Art. IV.—1. Waverley Novels. apo — with the Author’s 
Notes. Edinburgh: 1829, 30, 31, 32. 


Tales of my Landlord, Fourth and Last Series. Edinburgh : 
1832. 


\ 7 the conclusion of the Fourth and Last Series of the * Tales 
- of my Landlord,” is the following affecting passage :— 


The gentle reader is acquainted, that these are, in all probability, 
a last tales which it will be the lot of the Author to submit to the 
public. He is now on the eve of visiting foreign parts ; a ship of war 
is commissioned by its Royal Master to carry the Author of Waver- 
ley to climates in which he may possibly obtain such a restoration of 
health as may serve him to spin his thread to an end in his own coun- 
try. Had he continued to prosecute his usual literary labours, it 
scems indeed probable, that at the term of years he has already attain- 
ed, the bowl, to use the pathetic language of Scripture, would have 
been broken at the fountain ; and little can one, who has enjoyed on 
the whole an uncommon share of the most inestimable of worldly 
blessings, be entitled to complain, that life, advancing to its period, 
should be attended with its usual proportion of shadows and storms. 
They have affected him at least in no more painful manner than is 
inseparable from the discharge of this part of the debt of humanity. 
Of those whose relation to him in the ranks of life might have insu- 
red him their sympathy under indisposition, many are now no more ; 
and those who may yet follow in his wake, are entitled to expect, 
in bearing inevitable evils, an example of firmness and patience, more 












62 The Waverley Novels. April, 


especially on the part of one who has enjoyed no small good fortune 
during the course of his pilgrimage. 

‘The public have claims on his gratitude, for which the Author of 
Waverley has no adequate means of expression ; but he may be per- 
mitted to hope, that the powers of his mind, such as they are, may 
not have a different date from those of his body; and that he may 
again meet his patronising friends, if not exactly in his old fashion 
of literature, at least in some branch, which may not call forth the 
remark, that— 

Superfluous lags the veteran on the stage.’ 


Such an address—such an acknowledgment of gratitude to 
the public—from one to whom we are assuredly indebted for a 
larger amount and wider extension of intellectual pleasure, than 
was ever conferred in so short a period by any other person, 
especially demands our notice. We must all read with regret 
an annonncement of the probable termination of a career so bril- 
liant as has been that of the Author of Waverley; and though 
we may allow ourselves to hope that his decision as to his old 
fashion of literature” is not final, we may befittingly consider, 
on this occasion, what has been its character, and what that gra- 
titude which the reading public owes him. Various as have been 
the literary claims of Sir Walter Scott, we shall here then regard 
him only as a Novelist—as the greatest master in a department 
of literature, to which he has given a lustre previously unknown ; 
—in which he stands confessedly unrivalled, and not approached 
even within moderate limits, except, among predecessors, by Cer- 
vantes, and, among contemporaries, by the author of Anastasius. 

Perhaps no writer has ever enjoyed in his lifetime so exten- 
sive a popularity as the Author of Waverley. His reputation may 
be truly said to be not only British, but European—and even 
this is too limited a term. He has had the advantage of writing 
in a language used in different hemispheres by highly civilized 
communities, and widely diffused over the surface of the globe ; 
and he has written at a period when communication was facilita- 
ted by peace. While the wonder of his own countrymen, he has 
to an unexampled degree established an ascendency over the tastes 
of foreign nations. His works have been sought by foreigners with 
an avidity equalling, nay, almost exceeding, , that with which they 
have been received among us. The conflicting literary tastes of 
France and Germany, which twenty years ago seemed diame- 
trically opposed, and hopelessly irreconcilable, have at length 
united in admiration of him. In France he has effected a revo- 
lution in taste, and given victory to the ‘ Romantic School.’ 
He has had not only readers, but imitators. Among French- 
men, the author of * Cinq Mars’ may be cited as a tolerably 





a 























1832, The Waverley Novels, 63 


successful one. Italy, in which what we call ‘ Novels’ were 

previously unknown, has been roused from its torpor, and has 

found a worthy imitator of British talent in the author of the 

‘Promessi Sposi.’ Of the Waverley Novels, six editions 

have been published in Paris. Many of them have been trans- 

lated into French, German, Italian, and other languages. To 

be read both on the banks of the Ganges and the Ohio; and to 

he found, as is mentioned by Dr Walsh, where perhaps no 

other English book had ever come—on the very verge of civilisa- 
tion, on the borders of Turkey—this is indeed a wide reign and 
a proud distinction; but prouder still to be not only read, but 
to have subjugated, as it were, and moulded the literary tastes 
of the civilized world. Voltaire is the writer who, in his life- 
time, has approached nearest to this extent of popularity. Sove- 
reigns courted and corresponded with him; his own country- 
men were enthusiastic in his praise ; and so general was a know- 
ledge of the French language, that a large majority of the well- 
educated throughout Europe, were familiar with his writings. 
But much of this popularity was the popularity of partisanship. 
He served a cause; and for such service, and not alone as the 
meed of genius, were honours lavished upon him. The people 
of France, by whom he was almost deified in his latter years, 
regarded him less as the literary marvel of their land, than as the 
man once persecuted by despotism, and the ablest assailant of 
those institutions which they were endeavouring to undermine. 
But Voltaire, with all his popularity, has left impressed on lite- 
rature searcely any distinguishable traces of his power. He ex- 
hibited no marked originality of style—he founded no school— 
and as for his imitators, where are they? To justify the admi- 
ration he excited, one must consider not merely how well, but 
how much and how variously he has written. With the excep- 
tion of Voltaire, and perhaps of Lord Byron, there is scarcely a 
writer whose popularity, while he lived, passed beyond the pre- 
cinets of his own country. This, until latterly, was scarcely pos- 
sible. Till near the middle of the eighteenth century, what had 
heen long called the *‘ Republic of Letters’ existed only in name. 
It is not truly applicable but to the present period, when the 
transmission of knowledge is rapid and easy, and no work of un- 
questionable genius can excite much interest in any country, 
without the vibration being quickly felt to the uttermost limits 
of the civilized world. How little this was previously the case 
is evident from the fact, that numerous and important as were 
the political relations of England with the continent, and suc- 
cessfully as we had attended to the cultivation of letters, yet it 





64 The Waverley Novels. - April, 


is scarcely more than a hundred years since we were first 
known on the continent to have what might deserve to be 
called ‘a Literature. Shakspeare, Dryden, and Pope, succes- 
sively enjoyed in their own country the highest popularity as 
writers. Of these, it may reasonably be doubted whether the 
name of the first had been ever heard out of it. We can find no 
evidence which shows that the second had a wider fame. Pope 
was indeed better known; for literature had been made con- 
spicuous through honours paid to it by the statesmen of Queen 
Anne; and Pope was the friend of a peer politically eminent, and 
was thought, in conjunction with him, to have written a peem, 
of which, if the poetry was disregarded, the opinions were not 
unacceptable to the ¢ philosophers’ of the continent. 

In 1813, before the appearance of Waverley, if any one should 
have ventured to predict that a writer would arise, who, when 
every conceivable form of composition seemed not only to have 
been tried, but exhausted, should be the creator of one hitherto 
unknown, and which, in its immediate popularity, should exceed 
all others—who, when we fancied we had drained to its last drop 
the cup of intellectual excitement, should open a spring, not only 
new and untasted, but apparently deep and inexhaustible—that 
he should exhibit his marvels in a form of composition the 
least respected in the whole circle of literature, and raise the 
Novel to a place among the highest productions of human intel- 
lect—his prediction would have been received, not only with 
incredulity, but with ridicule ; and the improbability would have 
been heightened, had it been added, that all this would be effected 
with no aid from the influence of established reputation, but by 
a writer who concealed his name. The productions of the Au- 
thor of Waverley are virtually novelties in our literature. They 
form a new species. They were, it is true, called Historical 
Novels; and works bearing that appellation had existed before. 
But these were essentially different; they were not historical 
in the same sense; and were as little to be classed with the 
Waverley Novels, as are a chronological index or a book of 
memoirs, because the same names and circumstances may be 
alluded to in each. The misnamed historical novels which we 
possessed before Waverley, merely availed themselves of histori- 
cal names and incidents, and gave to the agents of their story the 
manners and sentiments either of the present period, or, much 
more commonly, of none. The best among them were only 
improvers of the system of Calprenede and Scuderi. They 
purified it from what was ridiculous or bombastic, but they 
left it still artificial They evinced no endeavour to breathe 




















1832. The Waverley Novels. 65 


into it the spirit of history. All in what was so called, beyond 
the contents of the most barren abridgement, was disregarded by 
such writers. The manners, habits, feelings, phraseology, and 
allusions of other times and other countries were set at nought. 
They embodied nothing but names and incidents. The actors 
in their tales were of the common staple of romance; tricked 
out with a nomenclature which authentic records had exhibited 
before. They were, for the most part, not the individual named, 
or any individual, but a mere abstract being, as purely ideal as 
the well-bred Achilleses and Bajazets of the French stage. To 
Sir Walter Scott belongs the honour of having first shown how 
history ought to be made available for the purposes of fiction. 
He made a discovery in literature ;—one of those of which the 
merit is evinced by its apparent obviousness when revealed, and 
by our wonder that it had never been made before. Imitation 
has been so extensive, and we are become so familiar with 
this application of history,—this attention to localities, to man- 
ners and costume,—and so nearly impossible does it seem that 
historical fictions should be written otherwise, that we are in 
danger of forgetting the merit of the original discoverer. 

It is now many years since any novel by the Author of Wa- 
verley has been noticed in this Journal. The last noticed was 
the Fortunes of Nigel ; and, since that time, what a multitude has 
appeared! It is not, however, our intention to attempt a separate 
analysis of the subsequent novels. We are withheld partly by their 
number, partly because a more interesting and profitable task is 
offered to our attention in a general consideration of those cha- 
racteristics which principally distinguish this great writer ; and 
of those points of excellence which have gained for him his un- 
equalled popularity. We have long admired—let us now en- 
quire why we have admired, and whether rationally and justly. 

One of the points of view in which the Author of Waverley 
is first presented to us is, as a delineator of human character. 
When we regard him in this light, we are struck at once by the 
fertility of his invention, and the force, novelty, and fidelity of 
his pictures. He brings to our minds, not abstract beings, but 
breathing, acting, speaking individuals. Then what variety ! 
What originality! What numbers! What a gallery has he set 
before us! No writer but Shakspeare ever equalled him in this 
respect. Others may have equalled, perhaps surpassed him, in 
the elaborate finishing of some single portrait (witness the im- 
mortal Knight and Squire of Cervantes, Fielding’s Adams, 
and Goldsmith’s Vicar); or may have displayed, with greater 
skill, the morbid anatomy of human feeling—and our slighter 
VOL, LY. NO, CIX- E 











66 The Waverley Novels. April, 


foibles and finer sensibilities have been more exquisitely touched 
by female hands—but none save Shakspeare has ever contri- 
buted so largely, so valuably, to our collection of characters ;— 
of pictures so surprisingly original, yet, once seen, admitted im- 
mediately to be conformable to Nature. Nay, even his anomalous 
beings are felt to be generally reconcilable with our code of 
probabilities ; and, as has been said of the supernatural creations 
of Shakspeare, we are impressed with the belief, that if such 
beings did exist, they would be as he has represented them. 
The descriptions of persons by the Author of Waverley are 
distinguished chiefly by their picturesqueness. We always seem 
to behold the individual described. Dress, manner, features, and 
bearing, are so vividly set before us, that the mental illusion is 
rendered as complete as words can make it. But if we feel thus 
familiar with the personage introduced, it is rather because the 
mind’s eye has received his image, than because we are endowed 
with a knowledge of his character. It is the outward, not the 
inward man, that most engages our attention. We comprehend 
Iago perfectly, without knowing what manner of man he was 
to look upon. But Varney, Rashleigh, or Christian, must be 
presented mentally to the eye, as well as to the understanding, 
before we can feel an equal intimacy. The method of Sir Walter 
Scott has the merit of individualizing an imaginary person in a 
remarkable degree, and is well suited to the nature of the Novel. 
It effects much of what, in the drama, is supplied by the actor who 
represents a character on the stage. But it is an inferior art to 
that of unveiling the recesses of the mind, and presenting to us 
thoughts, passions, tastes, and springs of action—causing us, in 
fact, to perceive and know the person, not merely as if he stood 
before us, but as if he had Jong been our intimate acquaintance. 
The best drawn characters of the Author of Waverley make 


ts feel as if we saw and heard them; those of Shakspeare as if 


we had lived with them, and they had opened their hearts to us 
in confidence. We are trying Sir Walter Scott by the severest 
of all possible tests, in comparing him with a hitherto unrivalled 
portrayer of human character; and though we think the inter- 
val not inconsiderable, we have no hesitation, upon a view of all 
his qualities, in regarding him eminently worthy of the second 
place. Nor do we say, that, though picturesqueness is the pro- 
minent characteristic of his descriptions of persons, he does not 
also exhibit considerable skill in displaying the disposition and 
qualities of the mind ;—nay, there are several characters of 
whom we have a very vivid impression, without its having been 
conveyed so much by personal description as by the insight given 
us into the peculiarities of disposition. We may take as instances 





ee 





~o 





1832, The Waverley Novels. 67 


Jeanie Deans, Colonel Mannering, Bailie Jarvie, Glossin, 
Foster, and his daughter. We have here mentioned fictitious 
personages; but the merit of the author is perhaps displayed 
more conspicuously in his treatment of those subjects in which 
the groundwork is already laid—in his wonderful reproduction 
of historical individuals. His James I. is a portrait of the rarest 
merit; and his Elizabeth, his Louis XI., Charles Edward, Lord 
Lindesay, Robert III., Rothesay, Albany, and the imbecile father 
of Margaret of Anjou, may also -be cited among those which 
are presented to us with more than common discrimination and 
force. 

Admirable also, and, we may add, unrivalled, are his de- 
lineations of those who, though they cannot strictly be called 
historical personages, yet owe their most marked peculiarities 
to the influence of great historical events, the current opinion 
of the times in which they lived, or the party to which they 
were attached. They are specimens of a class: and though 
the actual persons never lived, yet in some of them there is as 
much of the true spirit of history,—as much that clearly unfolds 
to us the character of other times, as in the most able of the 
aforenamed portraits. Look, for example, at his Covenauters and 
his Puritans. In describing them, he has avoided an error into 
which an inferior writer would have fallen. He has not collect- 
ed all the qualities which were characteristic of those sects, and 
formed therefrom an abstract being, who, probably without re- 
sembling any single individual of them that ever had existed, 
was in his proper person to represent them all. To personify 
in such a manner is not to draw nature as it is. He has well 
considered that, though a prevailing impression may be given 
by one powerful class of opinions, yet will the individual traits 
of disposition, which vary in each as much almost as do the 
lineaments of the face, not be utterly absorbed and obliterated, 
but show themselves through it, and modify the dominant habit. 
Burley, Macbriar, Mucklewrath, Gilfillan, David Deans, and 
Bridgenorth, are all sectarians, deeply imbued with a gloomy 
ascetic spirit of fanaticism. But the fanaticism of one of these 
is not as the fanaticism of another; but takes a different course 
according to the direction which it receives from the original 
bias of the disposition. All this is admirably discriminated in 
the characters mentioned. Deep and sombre as is the colouring, 
it is so transparent that we see through it the inward native 
workings of the heart. The original character is visible through 
that which cireumstances have superinduced; and we feel as 
though we could almost tell what each of these would have been 





68 The Waverley Novels. April, 


if he had not been a fanatic. Characters so delineated exhibit 
the highest refinement of skill. 

The female characters in the Waverley Novels are touched with 
much grace and spirit, though they are not, upon the whole, 
brought so vividly to our minds as the men,—probably because 
they are more ideal. Such they must necessarily be. The course 
of woman’s existence glides comparatively unobserved in the 
under-current of domestic life ; and the records of past days fur- 
nish little note of their condition. Few materials are available 
from which the historical novelist can deduce an accurate notion 
of the relative situation of women in early times. We know very 
little either of the general extent of their cultivation and acquire- 
ments, or of the treatment which they received from men. On 
the latter point, we must not allow ourselves to be deceived by 
the poetical effusions of gallantry, and the false varnish of chi- 
valrous devotion. It is to be feared that the practice of the days 
of chivalry was much at variance with its professions; and that 
women were degraded, as we always find them wherever civil- 
isation has made little progress. It was by command of Edward 
J. of England, the Mirror of Chivalry, one of the bravest knights 
in the host of the Crusaders, that two of the noblest ladies in 
Scotland were hung up in iron cages, exposed like wild beasts 
to the view of the populace. Facts like this mark the standard 
of public feeling, and may teach us that there was little real 
consideration for women in those times ;—and where that is not 
found, there can be }ittle refinement. Scantiness of informa- 
tion, and the necessity of assimilating to modern tastes a pic- 
ture which, if it could have been obtained, would probably have 
been disagreeable, has obliged the Author of Waverley to draw 
much from the resources of his poetical mind in the depicting of 
female character. And wisely has he so done; for we regard 
many of the females in his tales only as beautiful and poetical 
creations; and we are gratified without being deceived. We 
find no fault with him for having made his Minna and Brenda 
beings such as the daughters of a Shetland Udaller, nearly a 
century and a half ago, were not likely to have been ;—we blame 
him not because in his Rebecca, that most charming production 
of an imagination rich with images of nobleness and beauty, he 
has exhibited qualities incompatible with the real situation of the 
daughter of that most oppressed and abject being, a Jew of the 
twelfth century. It is plain that if Minnaor Rebecca had been 
drawn with a strict regard to probability, and made just such as 
they were most likely to have been, one of the great objects of 
fiction would have been reversed ; the reader would have been 














1852. The Waverley Novels. 69 


repelled instead of being attracted. This poetical tone per- 
vades, more or less, the delineations of all his heroines; and 
the charm which it imparts, perhaps more than counterbalances 
the detrimental tendency of sameness. At the same time, we 
may add, that it is least exhibited when circumstances seem 
least to require it. His heroines are, on the whole, better 
treated, as such, than his heroes, who are, for the most part, 
thrown into the ring to be bandied about, the sport of cireum- 
stances ;—owing almost all their interest to the events which 
thicken around them. Many of them exhibit no definite cha- 
racter, or, when they rise above nonentities, are not so much 
individuals as abstractions. A strong fraternal likeness to the 
vacillating Waverley does not raise them in our esteem. They 
seem too nearly imitations of the most faulty portion of that 
otherwise admirable tale. 

In the description of external objects, and particularly of what 
may be called natural scenery, Sir Walter Scott has been suc- 
cessful beyond all writers subsequent to Milton. We have heard 
Mrs Radcliffe’s descriptions much commended ; but whoever will 
compare her with the Author of Waverley, will perceive the differ- 
ence between mere copiousness of descriptive diction, and a rich 
and judicious selection of images—between passages which please 
the ear, and those which convey a distinct impression to the mind. 
It is essential in a description of visible objects, that it should 
place the reader in the situation of a spectator. Few perhaps at- 
tempt to describe, who do not acknowledge this principle ; but of 
these, few act in accordance with it. Some fail, because they 
present to us objects as they are, rather than as they appear ; and 
give us the deductions of reason, instead of the simple evidence 
of the senses. Others, though they in part describe objects as 
they appear to the spectator, yet mix them confusedly with cir- 
cumstances of which the eye could not have taken cognisance at 
all,—or could not have seen from the same point of view. To 
speak at once both of the figure and the weight of a helmet, or 
to describe minutely the dress of a person just visible on the 
distant horizon, is to commit an error of this kind. This mixture 
of the visible with the invisible, the external with the intrinsic, 
infallibly creates confusion, and prevents the whole image from 
coming distinctly and forcibly to the mind of the reader. Others 
again, though they do not offend in these respects, overpower 
us with the exuberance of their images—they give us a cata- 
logue of objects, instead of a selection—they enumerate almost 
every thing that could be seen at one time and in one place,— 
forgetting that among all these objects the attention would be 
arrested only by a few; nor could the mind find room for 














70 The Waverley Novels. April, 


more. We require to be told, not the objects that might ulti- 
mately excite attention, but those which would strike the senses 
first: we require not that we shall be enabled to make the selec- 
tion for ourselves, but that the describer shall select for us. A 
multiplicity of details is tiresome; and no description, however 
complete, can be effective as description, if it contain more par- 
ticulars than the mind can at one view embrace, and, without a 
painful effort of the memory, retain. From these various errors 
into which descriptive writers often fall, Sir Walter Scott is 
perhaps more exempt than any other. His descriptions of scenery, 
even in spite of a want of terseness with which his general style 
is chargeable, are in the highest degree clear, vivid, and intelli- 
gible. They have none of those affectations of gorgeous diction, 
which are the resource of ordinary writers: all is perspicuous, 
and reasonably concise ;—written as if the first object proposed 
was,—to be understood ; and the poetical associations which are 
strewed in the path serve to illustrate and impress the subject, 
instead of leading us astray into the realms of fanciful specu- 
lation. 

These remarks are not applicable to such matters of mere 
detail as the description of costume, of equipments, or of furni- 
ture. Many of these, if we try them on a question of taste, will 
be admitted to be tedious; but we must view them in another 
light, and accept them as affording information which we could 
not have obtained, but at an expense of trouble and research, 
for which their real value would scarcely compensate. Good as 
are the descriptions of quiescent objects, it is in his treatment 
of events,—of the visible operations of man, or of the elements, 
—that the author displays most power. What have we finer of 
its kind, than the storm in the Antiquary? The sullen sunset 
—the advancing tide—the rocks half hidden by the rising foam 
—the marks of promised safety fading from sight, and with 
them the hope they nourished—the ledge which the sufferers 
gained with difficulty--on the one side, a raging sea, and on 
the other, a barrier that forbade retreat! Guy Mannering 
contains another masterpiece—the night attack of Portanferry, 
witnessed by Bertram. We feel as though we were that per- 
son—we see and hear all of which his eyes and ears had cog- 
nisance ; and the impression is the more strong, because the 
writer has told only that, and left the rest to our imagination. 
This illustrates one feature of the author’s skill. He knows the 
effect producible by leaving circumstances in the incomplete- 
ness and obscurity in which they often present themselves to the 
senses of a single person: he tells just what that person could 
have perceived, and leaves the sketch to be finished by his 





—. 


See 












Ra I EE IO oe LL A TA TTR Sittin ae 
ie 











1632 The Waverley Novels. q1 


reader. Thus, when Porteous is hurried away to execution, we 
attend his ruthless conductors, but we wait not to witness the 
last details, but flee with Butler from the scene of death, and, 
looking back from afar, see through the lurid glare of torches a 
human figure dangling in the air—and the whole scene is more 
present to our minds, than if every successive incident had been 
regularly unfolded. Thus, when: Ravenswood and his horse 
vanish from the sight of Colonel Ashton, we feel how the im- 
pressiveness and beauty of the description are heightened by 
placing us where the latter stood,—showing us no more than he 
could have witnessed, and bidding our imaginations fill up the 
awful doubtful chasm. 

That the Author of Waverley is a master of the pathetic, 
is evinced by several well-known passages. Such are the fune- 
ral of the fisherman’s son in the Antiquary—the imprisonment 
and trial of Effie Deans, and the demeanour of the sister and 
the broken-hearted father—the short narrative of the smuggler 
in Redgauntlet—many parts of Kenilworth—and of that finest of 
tragic tales, the Bride of Lammermoor. We must pause to notice 
the last. In this, above other modern productions, we see em- 
bodied the dark spirit of fatalism,—that spirit which breathed in 
the writings of the Greek tragedians, when they traced the per- 
secuting vengeance of Destiny against the houses of Laius and 
of Atreus. Their mantle was for a while worn unconsciously 
by him who showed to us Macbeth : and here again, in the deep- 
ening gloom of this tragic tale, we feel the oppressive influence 
of this invisible power. From the time we hear the prophetic 
rhymes, the spell has begun its work, and the clouds of mis- 
fortune blacken round us; and the fated course of events moves 
solemnly onward, irresistible and unerring as the progress of 
the sun, and soon to end in a night of horror. We remember 
no other tale in which not doubt, but certainty, forms the ground- 
work of our interest. 

The plots in the Waverley Novels generally display much in- 
genuity, and are interestingly involved; but there is not one in 
the conduct of which it would not be easy to point out a blemish. 
None have that completeness which constitutes one of the chief 
merits of Fielding’s From Jones. There is always either an im- 
probability, or a forced expedient, or an incongruous incident, 
or an unpleasant break, or too much intricacy, or a hurried con- 
clusion, They are usually languid in the commencement, and 
abrupt in the close; too slowly opened, and too hastily sum- 
med up. Guy Mannering is one of those in which these two 
faults are least apparent. The plot of Peveril of the Peak might 





72 The Waverley Novels. April, 


perhaps, on the whole, have been considered the best, if it had 
not been spoiled by the finale. 

It may be said of the novels of Sir Walter Scott, as of the 
plays of Shakspeare, that though they never exhibit an attempt 
to enforce auy distinct moral, they are, on the whole, favourable 
to morality. They tend (to use a common expression) to keep 
the heart in its right place. They inspire generous emotions, 
and a warm-hearted and benevolent feeling towards our fellow- 
creatures ; and for the most part afford a just and unperverted 
view of human character and conduct. In them a very sparing 
use is made of satire—that weapon of questionable utility—which 
perhaps has never yet done much good in any hands, not even 
in those of Pope or Young. Satire is thought useful, too much 
because it gratifies the uncharitableness of our nature. But to 
hold up wisdom and virtue to our admiration, is better than to 
apply the lash, however dexterously, to vice and folly. There are, 
perhaps, no fictions exciting the imagination so strongly as the 
Waverley Novels, which have a less tendency to corrupt the 
heart ; and it is, chiefly, because they do not exhibit flattering 
and delusive pictures of crime. In this again they resemble the 
plays of Shakspeare. Forcibly as that great dramatist has de- 
picted vice, and ably as he has sometimes shown its coexistence 
with physical energy and intellectual superiority,—much as he 
may teach us to admire the villain for some of his attributes, 
he never confounds the limits of right and wrong. He produces 
no obliquity in our moral sense, nor seduces us to lend our sym- 
pathy against the dictates of our better reason. Neither in his 
graver, nor in his gayer scenes, is there aught which can corrupt. 
He invests profligacy with no attractive colours, nor lends a 
false and imposing greatness to atrocious villainy. We admire 
the courage of Macbeth, the ability of Richard, the craft and 
dexterity of Iago, and the stubborn energy of Shylock,—but we 
never applaud, nor wish to emulate. We see them too truly as 
they are. The Author of Waverley, though he approaches near- 
er to the fault in question than Shakspeare, can never be fairly 
said to have committed it. Cleveland, Robertson, Rashleigh, 
Christian, might, by a few touches added, and a few expunged, 
become very captivating villains, and produce a brisk fermenta- 
tion of mischief in many young and weak heads. But of such 
false touches and suppressions of truth, the author has not been 
guilty. He has not disguised their vices and their weaknesses, 
—he has not endowed them with incompatible virtues ; but, 
just favouring them charitably, so as to take off the edge of our 
dislike, has exhibited them nearly as they must necessarily have 





” 




























1832. The Waverley Novels. 73 


been. The same discretion is observable in his impersonation of 
those equivocal characters in humble life which he has invested 
with an interest hitherto unknown. Meg Merrilies, Madge Wild- 
fire, Ratcliffe, and the Smuggler in Redgauntlet, are characters 
in whom are found redeeming traits of the best feeling, and 
which, therefore, interest us deeply. Yet all of them are more or 
less at war with order and the institutions of society, and must 
fall under its heavy ban. And, interested as we are, we are never 
led to deem the censures of society unjust, or to take part with 
them in their war against it. 

The Author of Waverley is never chargeable with that sin so 
visible in modern literature, which Lord Byron lent his genius 
to promote, and which humbler writers in verse and prose in- 
dustriously strive to spread. He has not laboured to diminish 
our confidence in virtue, and our abhorrence of vice. He does 
not teach us to believe that the villain probably has generous 
feelings, while the man who violates no law is as probably at 
heart a scoundrel. He tricks out for our delusion no impossible 
beings,—combining the commission of debasing crime with the 
possession of lofty sentiments and rigid virtue. He never takes 
his hero from among the dregs of pollution, yet endows him with 
ennobling attributes which he could never have possessed,— 
makes him a criminal of the deepest dye, yet bids us to admire 
his virtues,—and tells us that, tainted as he seems, he is better 
than the half of those whom society deems good and honest. 
Neither has the Author of Waverley ever written any of those 
tales which affect to have a moral, and which, after labouring 
to enlist our sympathies on the side of crime, and making us 
love and admire the criminal, plunge him at the close into mis- 
fortune,—excite our pity, and then claim the merit of doing good, 
because they showed that, somehow or other, in the end vice did 
not prosper. This right-headedness and right-heartedness, this 
healthy soundness of judgment and of principle in the Author 
of Waverley, are among those qualities for which posterity will 
lastingly admire him. 

Sir Walter Scott and Lord Byron have often been compared ; 
and the question has been mooted to which we should assign su- 
periority of genius. It is one of those questions which can scarce- 
ly be decided ; but if asked our opinion—we say to Sir Walter 
Scott—and for these reasons. Sir Walter Scott does not appear, 
like Lord Byron, to have written under the influence of morbid 
excitement, or availed himself of the resources of egotism. He 
did not draw from out the burning well of his own stormy pas- 
sions. He has been the master of his imagination, rather than 
the slave. He has controlled it as with the rod of an enchanter, 








74 The Wave ley Novels. April, 


and compelled it to do his bidding, instead of becoming, like the 
frantic Pythoness, the utterer of the eloquent ravings which were 
prompted by the demon that possessed her. His writings dis- 
play a calm consciousness of power. There is in them nothing of 
the feverishness of distemper ; and they are not sullied and cor- 
roded by the operation of human passions. He seems to have 
looked forth upon nature, serene and unruffled, from the wateh- 
tower of a commanding intellect. This calm superiority, this 
dismissal of self, is most observable in the works of Homer and 
Shakspeare. We know not from their writings what manner 
of men they were. They speak not of themselves. The pas- 
sions leave no trace of influence on their marvellous productions ; 
they wrote almost as though they had been spiritualized beings, 
disencumbered of the slough of humanity,—interested in human 
nature rather through love and pity, than through participation, 
—surveying and noting the hopes, the fears, the petty cares and 
vain pursuits, that occupied the world beneath them. In the 
writings of Sir Walter Scott there is much of this renunciation 
and suppression of self ; but there is also an occasional introduc- 
tion of it, of which we equally approve. We like to sce it exhi- 
bited in those evidences of mental sunshine and benevolence of 
heart, which beam forth in his kind and cheerful view of nature. 
His works are rich in generous sentiments. They contain no 
drop of misanthropy, and few pictures of villainy unmitigated 
by some redeeming trait. It is singular, that, though he is 
charged with aristocratic illiberality, no writer has exhibited 
the rustic character in so pleasing a light; and though classed 
by some among bigots, he has shown a spirit far more indul- 
gent and less cynical than that of his accusers. 

We may here notice some other faults of which the Author of 
Waverley has been accused. It has been said that he displays 
a spirit hostile to the progress of modern civilisation, and labours 
too much to make us in love with the venerable errors of former 
times. Such a fault will not be felt by one who reads his works 
aright ;—who perceives that his attachment to the manners of 
antiquity is to be considered merely as a poetical attachment. 
He is won by their picturesqueness, and by their peculiar applica- 
bility to those purposes which lie within the province of romance. 
But to suppose, that because his imagination delights in them, 
his judgment must approve, is an unfair deduction. We have 
seen nothing in the writings of Sir Walter Scott, as we have 
unfortunately in the writings of other men of no mean talent, 
which indicates that he regards with an evil eye the increasing 
spirit of modern improvement. He is too philanthropic and far- 








1832. The Waverley Novels. 15 


sighted, to view, with indifference, much less with dislike, that 
spirit of industry and invention which is so rapidly promoting 
the wealth and comforts of the human race. 

Again, he is accused of being partial in his delineations of 
historical events. This is to try him as though he were an his- 
torian; for though the historian is bound to be impartial, there 
is no such strict obligation for the novelist. To expect an ab- 
sence of all political bias in one who has given any attention to 
political subjects, is to expect perhaps almost an impossibility. 
A bias is discernible in the opinions of Sir Walter Scott ; and we 
shall not be suspected of viewing it too indulgently, when we 
say, that it is opposed to our own. But weare not conscious 
of its having led him into any unfairness. Nothing can be more 
impartial than his tale of Old Mortality. We may suspect 
the author’s leaning towards the cause of the Government ; but 
we can collect no such inference from this single story. Each 
party furnishes objects of admiration as well as of ridicule and 
disgust. While we condemn the fanaticism of the insurgents, we 
admire them for their heroism: while we are made to feel that 
the established authorities had fewer absurdities on their side, 
we are presented with so dark a picture of their oppressive ty- 
ranny, as more than justifies the resistance it excited. A pre- 
possession for the Jacobite and Tory cause has not withheld him 
from doing full justice to its opponents ; and from exhibiting in 
the unfortunate Charles Edward, those weaknesses which ren- 
dered him little worthy of the heroic devotedness of his adhe- 
rents. 

It may be objected, that the Author of Waverley too often 
imitates himself, and reproduces, under other names, characters 
which he has described before. The objection is just; but it 
would be unreasonable to expect from an imagination so fertile, 
that it should always be original,—that it should never stray 
again into paths already trodden, but exhibit a perpetual fresh- 
ness, of which no very productive genius, save Shakspeare, has 
ever afforded an example. Though we are delighted with the 
cheerful spirit of this author’s writings, we cannot applaud his 
wit, Itis generally clumsy, inelegant, and verbose. It may be 
more properly called ¢‘ humour ;’ and though it may often excite 
a smile, is among the least meritorious parts of his productions. 
There are several ludicrous incidents well told, and which may 
raise a hearty laugh; but, upon the whole, facetiousness is not 
his forte. Contrary to what ought to be the case, and unmindful 
that * brevity is the soul of wit,’ he is ever most verbose when 
he is disposed to be mirthful. Many of his humourists are tedious 
to the last degree ; and we are restored to common charity with 

















































16 The Waverley Novels. April, 


them, and think them comparatively venial, only by seeing the 
dismal exaggerations of the same kind of character in the novels 
of Cooper. We would gladly have dispensed with the long ban- 
tering introductions, with their Jedediah Cleishbotham and Cap- 
tain Clutterbuck, and other such fictions,;—cumbrous, unamu- 
sing, and improbable,—pretending to account for the production 
of tales which required no such apology. They are quite un- 
worthy to stand at the head of the works they usher in. In the 
excellent new edition, which is enriched with so many prefaces 
and notes of real value and interest, we regret that this useless 
machinery is preserved. 

Beauty of style is not one of Sir Walter Scott’s chief merits. 
His choice of expressions is, however, better than his disposition 
of them. His sentences are too full of expletives,—too long, and 
loosely arranged ; exuberant, like his fancy, and untrimmed, as if 
never subjected to a process of compression,—a lime labor, per- 
haps incompatible with the wonderful expedition with which work 
after work has issued from the press. This facility of produc- 
tion is too remarkable to be overlooked. It is almost unexam- 
pled. Voltaire and Lord Byron have written some of their best 
works in an inconceivably short time. Dryden produced five act 
plays at the rate of three a-year. Shakspeare is supposed in one 
year to have written five, among which is that whereon he must 
have expended most thought—Hamlet. This, considering the 
value of the productions, would perhaps be the greatest feat on 
record, if we could be sure that the plays had been wholly in- 
vented and written within the twelvemonth—but this cannot be 
ascertained. Nevertheless, for long continued fertility of pen, 
perhaps SirWalter Scott may be safely said to have never been 
exceeded. 

Two remarks have been repeated, till many receive them as 
undeniable axioms; and we notice them only for that reason. 
One is, that the Author of Waverley’s earliest productions are 
decidedly his best—the other, that he is never so great as when 
he treads on Scottish ground, In neither assertion is there much 
truth. Are Ivanhoe, Peveril of the Peak, Quentin Durward, 
Nigel, and Kenilworth, inferior to St Ronan’s Well, the Mo- 
nastery, and the Abbot? May not the first mentioned five be 
ranked among the best of his novels? and must they unques- 
tionably yield to Rob Roy or the Antiquary? or does one of our 
latest favourites, the Maid of Perth, betray much deficiency of 
that vigour which characterised the first-born Waverley? Few 
will answer in the affirmative. 

In reviewing the productions of a great writer, interesting as 
it may be to examine their general character, and the nature of 





1832. The Waverley Novels. 77 


those merits on which their fame is grounded, it is perhaps still 
more interesting to trace their influence upon literature. That 
of the Waverley Novels has been great beyond example. That 
they have invited a good deal of talent to employ itself in the 
cause of direct imitation, is but an insignificant part of their 
effects. Nor do we even Jay most stress upon the impulse given 
to the composition of fictitious narrative of every kind. For 
novel-writing, in general, the Author of Waverley has done 
much: First, he has made it a more creditable exercise of ability 
than it was previously considered; and thus invited to it many 
writers who might otherwise have considered it unworthy of their 
regard. But, beyond this, he has shown them how they should 
pursue it. He has taught them that in whatever period, country, 
or sphere of society, their fictions may be laid, they must first look 
forth upon Nature. They must not indulge the untaught prompt- 
ings of a wild imagination, but set down only that which they 
have first ascertained to be in accordance with general truth. 
Though fiction may be truly the offspring of imagination, it can- 
not be successful unless tutored by experience. In consequence 
of this newly-enlarged view of the principles on which fiction 
should be written, we have, since the appearance of Waverley, 
seen the fruits of varied learning and experience displayed in that 
agreeable form; and we have even received from works of fiction 
what it would once have been thought preposterous to expect— 
information. From some, we have gathered more respecting the 
manners of different tribes than books of travels have ever told 
us; and have obtained a clearer insight into the eventful inte- 
rior of a soldier or a sailor’s life, and the real nature of war and 
its concomitants, than from all the gazettes that were ever pub- 
lished, and many biographies to boot. We have learnt, too, how 
greatly the sphere of the Novel may be extended, and how capable 
it is of becoming the vehicle almost of every species of popular 
knowledge. 

Still higher benefits are derivable from a right consideration 
of the Waverley Novels. Without one word of direct precept, 
they have made us feel more than any essays or lectures ever 
did, to what end histery should be read, and in what manner it 
should be written. Combining materials drawn from scattered 
sources, they have given us pictures of past days, which what 
is commonly called history had neglected to afford. We now 
feel more fully that dates and names,—nay, even the articles of 
a treaty, or the issue of a battle, although desirable pieces of 
knowledge, are yet trivial, compared with the importance and 
utility of being able to penetrate below that surface on which 
float the great events and stately pageants of the time. Since 








78 The Waverley Novels. April, 


history is precept teaching by example,’ we must, in order to 
obtain more fully the advantages it can confer, enable ourselves, 
—by an acquaintance with minor details, and with the habits, 
condition, and opinions of former races, and by being as though 
we had lived among them,—to institute a closer comparison be- 
tween the complexion of their times and that of our own. Great 
changes in the condition and opinions of a people will silently 
and gradually take place, unmarked by any signal event ; whilst 
events the most striking, and apparently important, will glitter 
and vanish like bubbles in the sun, and leave no visible trace of 
their effect. History has been hitherto too prone to note with 
eagerness only the latter ;—avoiding, as if with disdain, the more 
difficult, honourable, and useful task, of tracing the progress of 
the former. History is, in truth, the biography of a nation ; 
and a history which neglects, as unworthy of its dignity, the 
combination of both these requisites, is as inferior in interest and 
utility to a history which possesses them, as a biography contain- 
ing only the public actions of a great man, is less desirable than 
one which admits us to partake of his conversation and opinions. 
At present we have only the extremes. We have the stately 
political history and the gossiping memoir. But the former wants 
detail and extension of view; the latter, selection and classifica- 
tion of materials, and judicious inferences from attested facts. The 
public now desire to see these requisites well blended; and to 
this growing desire we conceive that no slight impulse has been 
given by the works of the Author of Ws averley. People have 
been surprised to find in novels new lights which history never 
gave; and for which, though it could not have afforded them 
in an equal degree, they ought at least to have been prepared. 
Hlistory has been, in consequence of his works, much read by 
those who would otherwise have neglected it. Still more, per- 
haps, has enquiry been directed towards its adjuncts and sub- 
sidiaries — towards biographical and antiquarian researches. 
Never has the press been more fertile than during the last ten 
years in this species of agreeable lore—in memoirs, diaries, and 
letters ; which convey much amusing information, and some that 
may with truth be called valuable. An i increasing appetite for 
this species of knowledge has called forth stores, of which the 
worth has never been sufficiently appreciated till now. 

If the public demand should incite any writer of sufficient 
ability to produce that desideratum in our literature, a History, 
which, to accuracy and deep research, shall add a comprehensive 
view of all that is most conducive to the welfare of a nation, and 
indicative of its condition, and which shall describe with the 
graphic vigour of romance, we shall have obtained a treasure of 














1832. Government of British India—Revenue Systems. 79 


great price. We shall be grateful to such a writer: but with 
our gratitude to him must be mingled an acknowledgment to the 
great Novelist, who, by works which have been ignorantly cen- 
sured for tampering with the majesty of history, and perverting 
its facts, has given an impulse by which the true study of history 
has been largely promoted. For this service, we little doubt, 
posterity will award its thanks. What other thanks it may 
award—what judgment it may pass on the Author of Waverley, 
is an useless speculation. The frequent reversal of judgments 
which every age has thought immutable, should teach us discre- 
tion in our prophesyings. Time may raise up other writers, whose 
comparative greatness may deprive him of his present eminence ; 
but it cannot deprive him of the merit of originality, and of 
having first opened a new and delightful path in literature. Not 
in a presumptuous spirit of prophecy, but as a token of our pre- 
sent admiration, we will say, that we think his Novels likely to 
endure as long as the language in which they are written. 


