Abt.  VI.  —  1.  Vanity  Fair :  a  Novel  without  a  Hero.  By  Wil¬ 
liam  Makepeace  Tuackekay.  London:  1849. 

2.  The  History  of  Pendennis.  By  William  Makepeace 
Thackeray.  London:  1849. 

3.  The  History  of  Henry  Esmond,  a  Colonel  in  the  Service  of 
Her  Majesty  Queen  Anne.  Written  by  himself.  London: 
1853. 

4.  The  English  Humourists  of  the  Eighteenth  Century:  a  Series 
of  lectures.  By  WiLLiAM  MAKEPEACE  Thackeray. 

.London:  1853. 

"WT" e  had  intended  to  review  the  whole  of  !Mr.  Thackeray’s 
’  writings ;  but  when  we  came  to  examine  the  twelve  volumes 
which  have  been  poured  forth  from  the  New  York  Press,  and 
considered  that  they  were  only  the  forerunners  of  the  three 
great  novels  which  we  have  placed  at  the  head  of  this  Article, 
we  felt  that,  if  we  attempted  to  criticise  all,  we  must  treat  each 
superficially.  We  have  resolved,  therefore,  to  confine  ourselvfes 
to  the  works  on  which  Mr.  Thackeray’s  fame  really  rests,  and 
to  leave  Fitz-Boodle,  and  Barry  Lyndon,  and  Men’s  Wives, 
and  the  Snobs,  and  the  Yellow  Plush  Papers,  and  the  Prize 
Novelists,  and  Mr.  Brown’s  Letters,  and  Mr.  Titmarsh’s  Tra¬ 
vels,  under  the  anonymous  or  pseudonymous  veils  in  which  their 
author  thought  fit  to  envelope  them.  We  shall  begin,  there¬ 
fore,  with  Vanity  Fair. 

We  cannot  tell  what  Mr.  Thackeray’s  genius  and  diligence 
may  still  have  in  store  for  us;  but  of  their  numerous  pro¬ 
ducts  up  to  the  present  time.  Vanity  Fair  appears  to  us  by 
far  the  best,  the  fullest  of  natural  and  amusing  incident,  and 
of  characters  with  bold  and  firm  outlines,  and  fine  and  con- 


1854. 


197 


Thackeray’s  Works. 

sistent  details.  It  is  called  ‘  A  Novel  without  a  Hero ;  ’  and 
certainly,  if  a  hero  or  a  heroine  be  a  person  fitted  to  attract  the 
affection  or  to  rouse  the  admiration  of  the  reader,  if  he  or  she  is 
to  be  reverenced  or  to  be  adored,  there  is  none  such  in  Vanity 
Fair.  There  are,  however,  two  marked  figures  which  so  far  act 
the  part  of  heroines  as  to  be  the  props  on  which  the  whole  tissue 
of  the  narrative  is  suspended,  the  centres  which  give  to  the  plot 
the  amount  of  unity  which  it  possesses.  These,  of  course,  are 
Amelia  and  Becky.  Their  outward  circumstances  have  much 
similarity.  Each  is  born  in  middle  life :  they  are  educated  at 
the  same  school ;  each  marries,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  military 
man ;  each  loses  her  husband,  though  not  by  similar  causes,  and 
is  left  with  a  single  boy ;  each  struggles  with  poverty ;  and  each 
withdraws  at  the  end  of  the  story  in  affluence.  An  ordinary  writer 
would  have  found  it  difficult  to  keep  distinct  characters  so 
similar  in  their  fortunes.  In  Mr.  Thackeray’s  hands  there  the 
resemblance  ends.  In  every  other  respect  they  are  not  merely 
different,  but  contrasted.  One  is  the  impersonation  of  virtue 
without  intellect,  the  other  that  of  intellect  without  virtue. 
One  has  no  head,  the  other  no  heart. 

Amelia  Sedley  is  amiable  by  instinct.  It  is  her  nature  to 
love  all  those  with  whom  she  comes  in  contact,  just  as  it  is 
the  nature  of  a  spaniel  to  caress  every  visitor.  But  her  love, 
being  founded  on  propinquity,  not  on  judgment,  is,  like  that  of 
the  spaniel,  indiscriminating.  She  likes  best  those  whom  she 
has  known  longest,  —  her  father,  her  mother,  her  husband,  and 
her  son,  —  and  simply,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained  from  their 
characters,  because  she  has  known  them  longest ;  for  in  them¬ 
selves  the  first  three  are  among  the  most  unloveable  speci¬ 
mens  of  this  rich  collection  of  deformities.  The  father  is  an 
ignorant,  vulgar  stock-broker,  coarse  and  insolent  in  pros¬ 
perity,  and  utterly  beaten  down  by  adversity.  There  are 
few  passages  in  the  work  more  highly  finished  than  the  inter¬ 
view  between  Sedley  after  his  bankruptcy  and  his  old  protaje 
Captain  Dobbin :  — 

‘“I  am  very  glad  to  see  you,  Captain  Dobbin,  Sir,”  said  be,  after 
a  skulking  look  or  two  at  his  visitor.  “  How  is  the  worthy  alderman, 
and  my  lady,  your  excellent  mother.  Sir  ?”  He  looked  round  at  the 
waiter  as  he  said,  “  my  lady,”  as  much  as  to  say.  Hark  ye,  John,  I 
have  friends  still,  and  persons  of  rank  and  reputation  too.  “  My  wife 
will  be  very  happy  to  see  her  ladyship.  I’ve  a  very  kind  letter  here 
from  your  father.  Sir,  and  beg  my  respectful  compliments  to  him. 
Lady  D - will  find  us  in  rather  a  smaller  house  than  we  were  ac¬ 

customed  to  receive  our  friends  in ;  but  it’s  snug,  and  the  change  of 
air  does  good  to  my  daughter,  who  was  sufiering  in  town  rather — 


198 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


you  remember  little  Emmy,  Sir?  —  Yes,  suffering  a  good  deal.” 
The  old  gentleman’s  eyes  were  wandering  as  he  spoke,  and  he  was 
thinking  of  something  else,  as  he  sate  thrumming  on  his  papers  and 
fumbling  at  the  worn  red  tape. 

‘ “You’re  a  military  man,”  he  went  on  ;  “I  ask  you.  Bill  Dobbin, 
could  any  man  ever  have  speculated  upon  tlie  return  of  that  Corsican 
scoundrel  from  Elba  ?  When  the  allied  sovereigns  were  here  last 
year,  and  we  gave  ’em  that  dinner  in  the  city.  Sir,  and  we  saw  the 
Temple  of  Concord,  and  the  fireworks,  and  the  Chinese  bridge  in 
St.  James’s  Park,  could  any  sensible  man  suppose  that  peace  wasn’t 
really  concluded,  after  we’d  actually  sung  Te  Deum  for  it.  Sir?  I 
ask  you,  William,  could  I  suppose  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria  was  a 
damned  traitor  —  a  traitor,  and  nothing  more  ?  I  don’t  mince  words 
—  a  double-faced  infernal  traitor  and  schemer,  who  meant  to  have 
his  son-in-law  back  all  along.  And  I  say  that  the  escape  of  Boney 
from  Elba  w’as  a  damned  imposition  and  plot.  Sir,  in  which  half  the 
powers  of  Europe  were  concerned,  to  bring  the  funds  down,  and  to 
ruin  this  country.  That’s  why  I’m  here,  William.  That’s  why  my 
name’s  in  the  Gazette.  Why,  Sir  ? — because  I  trusted  the  Emperor 
of  Russia  and  the  Prince  Regent  Look  here.  Look  at  my  papers. 
Look  what  the  funds  w'ere  on  the  1st  of  March,  —  what  the  French 
fives  were  when  I  bought  for  the  account, —  and  what  they’re  at  now. 
There  was  collusion,  Sir,  or  that  villain  never  would  have  escaped. 
Where  was  the  English  Commissioner  who  allowed  him  to  get  away? 
He  ought  to  be  shot.  Sir,  —  brought  to  a  court-martial,  and  shot,  by 
Jove.” 

‘“'WVre  going  to  hunt  Boney  out.  Sir,”  Dobbin  said,  rather 
alarmed  at  the  fury  of  the  old  man,  the  veins  of  whose  forehead  began 
to  swell,  and  who  sate  drumming  his  papers  with  his  clenched  fist. 
“  We  are  going  to  hunt  him  out.  Sir,  —  the  Duke’s  in  Belgium 
already,  and  we  expect  marching  orders  every  day.” 

‘  “  Give  him  no  quarter.  Bring  back  the  villain’s  head.  Sir.  Shoot 

the  coward  down.  Sir,”  Sedley  roared.  “  I’d  enlist  myself,  by - ; 

but  I'm  a  broken  old  man  —  ruined  by  that  damned  scoundrel  —  and 
by  a  parcel  of  swindling  thieves  in  this  country  whom  I  made.  Sir, 
and  who  are  rolling  in  their  carriages  now.”*  (Pp.  173,  174.) 

]Mr.  Sedley  is  merely  contemptible.  His  wife  is  equally 
contemptible,  but,  having  a  stronger  will,  is  also  odious.  Mr. 
Thackeray  has  delightfully  sketched  her  whole  character  in  the 
scene  in  which  she  quarrels  with  Amelia  for  exclaiming  that 
her  child  shall  not  be  poisoned  with  Daffy’s  Elixir. 

Mr.  Thackeray  adds : — 

‘Till  the  termination  of  her  natural  life,  this  breach  between 
Mrs.  Sedley  and  her  daughter  was  never  thoroughly  mended. 
The  quarrel  gave  the  elder  lady  numberless  advantages  which 
she  did  not  fail  to  turn  to  account  with  female  ingenuity  and  per¬ 
severance.  For  instance,  she  scarcely  spoke  to  Amelia  for  many 
weeks  afterwards.  She  warned  the  domestics  not  to  touch  the  child. 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


199 


as  Mrs.  Osborne  might  be  offended.  She  asked  her  daughter  to  see 
and  satisfy  herself  that  there  was  no  poison  prepared  in  the  little 
daily  messes  that  were  concocted  for  Georgy.  When  neighbours 
asked  after  the  boy’s  health,  she  referred  them  pointedly  to  Mrs. 
Osborne.  She  never  ventured  to  ask  whether  the  baby  was  well  or 
not.  She  would  not  touch  the  child,  although  he  was  her  grandson, 
and  own  precious  darling,  for  she  was  not  used  to  children  and  might 
kill  it.’  (P.345.) 

The  person,  however,  who  holds  the  first  place  in  Amelia’s 
heart  is  George  Osborne,  her  husband.  Mr.  Thackeray  has 
painted  him  at  full  length,  with  relentless  truth  and  detail. 
He  is  first  introduced  to  us  as  a  young  lieutenant,  the  accepted 
lover  of  Amelia,  fond  of  her  person,  and  pleased  by  her  admira¬ 
tion,  but  ashamed  of  her  family,  and  very  much  inclined  to  think 
that  he  is  throwing  himself  away — that  with  his  beauty  and 
talents  and  expectations  (his  father  is  great  in  the  tallow  trade), 
he  might  aspire  to  something  higher  than  a  stock-broker’s 
daughter.  Then  come  three  events  simultaneously.  He  gets 
his  company,  Amelia  is  ruined,  and  she  releases  him  from  his 
engagement.  He  tries  on  his  new  uniform,  and  thinks  it 
becomes  him  much ;  weeps  over  the  trinkets  and  hair  locket 
which  she  sends  back  to  him ;  and  tells  Dobbin,  with  some 
despondency,  that  ‘  all  is  over  between  them.’ 

Dobbin,  however,  disapproves  of  his  friend’s  easy  acquies¬ 
cence,  carries  him  back  to  his  betrothed,  and  never  leaves  him 
until  the  knot  has  been  tied,  and  the  new  couple  are  on  their 
road  to  Brighton. 

One  of  the  most  powerful  portraits  in  the  work  is  that  of 
old  Osborne,  George’s  father.  If  it  have  a  defect,  it  is  that  it 
is  too  uniformly  black.  It  is  made  up  of  arrogance,  vanity, 
malignity,  vindictiveness,  ingratitude ;  in  short,  of  all  the  bad 
passions  and  bad  tendencies  that  are  capable  of  coexistence.  Of 
course  he  disapproves  of  the  match,  and  notifies  to  George  that 
he  has  nothing  to  expect,  except  what  he  cannot  be  deprived  of, 
a  couple  of  thousand  pounds,  his  share  of  his  mother’s  fortune. 

These  are  the  comments  of  the  bridegroom  in  the  first  week 
of  his  honeymoon :  — 

‘  “  A  pretty  way  you  have  managed  the  affair,”  said  George,  look¬ 
ing  savagely  at  William  Dobbin.  “  Look  there,  Dobbin,”  and  he 
flung  over  to  the  latter  his  parent’s  letter.  “  A  beggar,  by  Jove,  and 
all  in  consequence  of  my  d  d  sentimentality.  Why  couldn’t 
we  have  waited  ?  A  ball  might  have  done  for  me  in  the  course  of 
the  war,  and  may  still,  and  how  will  Emmy  be  bettered  by  being  left 
a  beggar’s  widow  ?  It  was  all  your  doing.  You  were  never  easy 
until  you  had  got  me  married  and  ruined.  What  the  deuce  am  I  to 


200 


Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan' 

do  with  two  thousand  pounds  ?  Such  a  sum  won’t  last  two  years. 
I’ve  lost  a  hundred  and  forty  to  Crawley  at  cards  and  billiards  since  I’ve 
been  down  here.  A  pretty  manager  of  a  man’s  matters  you  are,  for¬ 
sooth.  Do  you  suppose  a  man  of  my  habits  can  live  on  his  pay  and  a 
hundred  a  year?  How  the  deuce  am  I  to  keep  up  my  position  in  the 
world  upon  such  a  pitiful  pittance  ?  I  can’t  change  my  habits.  I 
must  have  my  comforts.  I  wasn’t  brouglit  up  on  porridge  like  Mac 
Whirter,  or  on  potatoes  like  old  O’Dowd.  Do  you  expect  my  wife 
to  take  in  soldier’s  washing,  or  ride  after  the  regiment  in  a  baggage 
waggon?’*’  (P.211.) 

The  regiment  is  ordered  abroad,  and  the  scene  changes  to 
Brussels.  George  neglects  his  bride,  wastes  in  a  few  weeks  the 
little  capital  which  was  to  have  been  her  only  support,  tries  to 
seduce  her  friend,  hurries  from  the  Duchess  of  Richmond’s 
celebrated  ball  to  Quatre  Bras,  and  dies  at  Waterloo. 

The  amiable  ridiculous  character  in  the  drama  is  Dobbin; 
and  one  of  his  absurdities  is,  that  at  first  sight,  and  knowing 
that  she  is  engaged  to  his  friend  George,  he  falls  in  love  with 
Amelia.  Year  after  year,  during  her  widowhood,  he  urges  his 
suit — but  in  vain.  Her  heart  is  filled  by  the  recollection  of 
‘  that  departed  saint,’  her  husband.  At  length  it  suits  Becky 
that  Amelia  should  marry,  and  thus  she  effects  her  purpose. 

‘  “  Listen  to  me,  Amelia,”  said  Becky,  marebing  up  and  down  the 
room  before  the  otlier,  and  surveying  tier  with  a  sort  of  contemptuous 
kindness.  “  I  want  to  talk  to  you.  You  are  no  more  fit  to  live  in 
the  world  than  a  baby  in  arms.  Y^ou  must  marry,  or  you  and  your 
precious  boy  will  go  to  ruin  —  you  must  liave  a  husband,  you  fool; 
and  one  of  the  best  gentlemen  I  ever  saw  has  offered  to  you  a 
hundred  times.” 

‘  “  I  tried  — ,  I  tried  my  best,  indeed  I  did,  Rebecca,”  said  Amelia 

deprecatingly,  “  but  I  could  not  forget - ,”  and  she  looked  up  at 

George’s  portrait. 

‘  “  Could  not  forget  him,”  cried  Becky ;  “  that  selfish  humbug, 
that  low-bred  cockney  dandy,  that  padded  booby,  who  had  neither 
wit,  nor  manners,  nor  heart.  — Why,  the  man  would  have  jilted  you, 
but  that  Dobbin  made  him  keep  his  word.  lie  never  cared  for  you. 
He  used  to  sneer  about  you  to  me  time  after  time,  and  made  love  to 
me  the  week  after  he  married  you.” 

‘  “  It’s  false  !  It’s  false !”  said  Amelia,  starting  up. 

‘  “  Look  there,  you  fool,”  Becky  said,  still  with  provoking  good 
humour,  and  taking  a  little  paper  out  of  her  belt  flung  it  into  Amelia's 
lap.  “  You  know  his  hand-writing  ;  he  wrote  that  to  me,  —  wanted 
me  to  run  away  with  him,  —  gave  it  to  me  under  your  nose  the  day 
before  he  was  shot,  —  and  served  him  right,”  Becky  repeated.’ 
(Pp.  618,  619.) 

Amelia,  as  usual,  obeys,  and  marries  Dobbin  a  week  after. 

Amelia’s  boy  is  one  of  the  least  marked  characters.  Indeed 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


201 


it  is  difficult  to  make  a  child  attractive,  except  in  tragedy. 
Mamilius,  Arthur,  Edward  the  Fifth,  and  his  brother  affect  us, 
but  it  is  because  we  contrast  their  happy  childish  prattle  with 
the  dark  fate  that  is  soon  to  swallow  them  up.  If  they  had 
been  destined  to  a  long  and  happy  life,  we  should  have  been 
wearied  by  them.  Again,  the  youth  of  a  very  remarkable  man, 
of  Rousseau,  for  instance,  or  of  Southey,  is  instructive,  both  as 
it  shows  the  dawn  of  an  intellect  that  was  to  shine  so  brightly, 
and  as  it  enables  us  to  trace  many  of  the  moral  excellences  and 
defects  of  the  adult  to  the  training  of  the  child.  But  this  can 
be  done  only  in  an  autobiography.  Such  a  narrative  loses  its 
merit  with  its  reality.  Who  can  read  the  Emile  ?■ 

Now  as  little  Osborne  was  intended  for  wealth  and  prospe¬ 
rity,  he  could  not  be  made  interesting  by  contrast,  and  Mr. 
Thackeray  has  prudently  sketched  him  in  rather  indistinct 
colours,  as  a  handsome,  commonplace,  spoiled  boy,  likely  when 
he  should  come  of  age  to  spend  a  fortune,  but  certainly  not 
to  earn  one. 

Such  are  the  objects  of  Amelia’s  affections.  As  to  her 
actions,  few  of  them  are  really  hers.  She  generally  obeys, 
without  preference  and  without  reluctance,  the  impulse  given 
to  her  by  those  immediately  around  her.  In  obedience  to  her 
parents  she  falls  in  love  with  George  Osborne;  by  her  father’s 
orders  she  dismisses  him  ;  at  her  mother’s  bidding  she  resumes 
him.  The  only  act  in  which  she  exhibits  free-will  is  the  sur¬ 
render  of  her  son  to  his  grandfather.  The  struggle  which  she 
goes  through,  the  feelings  which  alternately  impel  and  restrain 
her,  are  described  with  exquisite  skill. 

The  evils  and  the  dangers  of  such  a  surrender  w’ere  scarcely 
capable  of  exaggeration.  To  give  up  a  child  of  ten  years  old 
to  the  absolute  management  of  a  stranger  is  a  frightful  risk, 
even  if  that  stranger  were  a  Fenelon.  To  give  it  up  to 
a  coarse,  uneducated,  violent  old  man ;  to  expose  it  to  be 
crushed  by  his  tyranny,  and  spoiled  by  his  indulgence ;  to  throw 
into  its  path  the  temptations  of  both  wealth  and  poverty,  those 
which  rouse  into  insolence,  and  those  which  degrade  into  ser¬ 
vility —  these  are  chances  from  which  a  sensible  mother  would 
have  recoiled.  No  hojies  of  wealth  or  grandeur;  no  fears, 
except  that  of  absolute  starvation,  would  have  induced  her  to 
incur  them. 

But  these  are  not  the  motives  which  influence  Amelia. 
They  do  not  even  occur  to  her: — as  far  as  the  boy  is  concerned, 
she  sees  nothing  in  ]Mr.  Osborne’s  offers  but  wealth,  station,  and 
education.  Yet  she  rejects  those  offers  with  indignation. 


202 


Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

‘  She  was  never,’  says  our  author,  ‘  seen  angry  but  twice  or 
thrice  in  her  life,  and  it  was  in  one  of  these  moods  that  Mr.  Osborne’s 
attorney  had  the  good  fortune  to  behold  her.  She  rose  up  trembling 
and  flushing,  and  tore  the  letter  into  a  hundred  fragments.  “  /  take 
money  to  part  from  my  child !  Who  dares  insult  me  by  proposing 
such  a  thing  ?  Tell  Mr.  Osborne  that  it  is  a  cowardly  letter.  Sir,  — 
a  cowardly  letter ; — I  will  not  answer  it. — I  wish  you  good  morning, 
Sir,” — and  she  bowed  me  out  of  the  room  like  a  tragedy  queen,  said 
the  lawyer  who  told  the  story.’  (P.  413.) 

The  cause  of  all  this  anger  is  simply  the  selfish  feeling  that 
she  cannot  bear  to  lose  the  society  of  her  son. '  Poverty,  how¬ 
ever,  comes  on  her  like  an  armed  man ;  every  resource  fiiils,  and 
she  ‘  tries  in  vain  to  hide  from  herself  the  thought  which 

*  w'ill  return  to  her,  that  she  ought  to  part  with  the  boy,  Chat 
‘  she  is  the  only  barrier  between  him  and  prosperity.  She 
‘  can’t,  she  can’t,  —  not  now  at  least.  Oh,  it  is  too  hard  to  think 
‘  of  and  to  bear.’  (P.  442.) 

At  length  she  submits.  ‘  The  sentence  is  passed,  —  the  child 
‘  must  go  from  her  to  others,  —  to  forget  her.  Her  heart,  her 
‘  treasure, — her  hope,  joy,  love,  worship, — she  must  give  him 

*  up.’  (P.  443.) 

The  boy  is  given  over  to  his  grandfather;  but  some  of  the 
evils  that  were  to  be  expected  do  not  follow.  Old  Osborne  has 
become  somewhat  mellowed  by  age  and  infirmity.  Georgy 
suffers  not  from  his  severity,  but  from  his  fondness.  Every 
stimulant  is  applied  to  his  vanity,  his  imperiousness,  and  his  self- 
indulgence.  ‘  How  he  du  damn  and  swear,’  the  servants  say,  de¬ 
lighted  by  his  precocity.  He  grows  up  domineering,  conceited, 
and  selfish.  But  the  feebleness  of  mind  which  prevented  his 
mother’s  anticipating  these  results,  prevents  her  perceiving  them. 
She  believes  him  to  be  perfect,  or,  what  in  her  eyes  is  the  same, 
to  be  his  father  over  again. 

The  reader  will  have  inferred,  from  the  attention  which  we 
have  paid  to  the  character  of  Amelia,  that  we  think  it  a  creation 
of  extraordinary  skill.  We  do  so.  It  appears  to  us  to  unite 
the  two  greatest  merits  that  a  fictitious  character  can  possess, — 
originality  and  nature.  And  yet  it  is  the  source  of  one  of  the 
greatest  blemishes  of  the  work.  Mr.  Thackeray  indulges  in  the 
bad  practice  of  commenting  on  the  conduct  of  his  dramatis  per¬ 
sona.  He  is  perpetually  pointing  out  to  us  the  generosity  of 
Dobbin,  the  brutality  of  the  Osbornes,  the  vanity  of  Joseph 
Sedley,  and  so  on,  instead  of  leaving  us  to  find  out  their  qua¬ 
lities  from  their  actions.  And  in  the  course  of  this  running 
commentary  he  keeps  repeating  that  Amelia  was  adorable;  that 
she  was  the  idol  of  all  w’ho  approached  her,  and  deserved  to  be 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


203 


so ;  in  short,  that  she  was  the  perfection  of  womanhood.  Now 
we  will  not  deny  that  she  had  qualities  which  would  make  her 
agreeable  as  a  plaything,  and  useful  as  a  slave  ;  but  playthings 
or  slaves  are  not  what  men  look  for  in  wives.  They  want  part¬ 
ners  of  their  cares,  counsellors  in  their  perplexities,  aids  in  their 
enterprises,  and  companions  in  their  pursuits.  To  represent  a 
pretty  face,  an  affectionate  disposition,  and  a  weak  intellect  as 
together  constituting  the  most  attractive  of  women,  is  a  libel 
on  both  sexes. 

We  must  now  take  up  Amelia’s  pendant,  Becky:  the  cha¬ 
racter,  among  all  that  Mr.  Thackeray  has  drawn,  which  has 
received  the  most  applause. 

When  we  said  that  she  was  the  impersonation  of  intellect 
without  virtue,  we  used  the  word  virtue  in  perhaps  too  narrow 
a  sense,  as  indicating  the  qualities  which  we  love,  the  qualities 
which  arise  from  the  sympathy  of  their  possessor  with  others, 
and  therefore  occasion  them  to  sympathise  with  him.  Now,  of 
these  qualities  Becky  is  devoid.  She  has  no  affection,  no  pity, 
no  disinterested  benevolence.  She  is  indeed  perfectly  selfish. 
She  wants  all  the  virtues  which  are  to  be  exercised  for  the 
benefit  of  others.  She  has  neither  justice  nor  veracity.  She 
treats  mankind  as  mankind  treats  the  brutes,  as  mere  sources 
of  utility  or  amusement,  as  instruments,  or  playthings,  or  prey. 
But  many  of  the  self-regarding  virtues  she  possesses  in  a  high 
degree.  She  has  great  industry,  prudence,  decision,  courage, 
and  self-reliance.  These  are  the  qualities  which,  when  under 
the  direction  of  a  powerful  intellect,  unbiassed  by  sympathies, 
and  unrestrained  by  scruples,  have  produced  many  of  the 
masters  of  mankind.  In  a  higher  sphere  Becky  might  have 
been  a  Semiramis  or  a  Catherine.  As  might  be  expected  in  a 
person  of  her  good  sense  and  self-control,  she  is  mistress  of  the 
smaller  virtues,  good  temper  and  good  nature;  she  always 
wishes  to  please,  because  it  is  only  by  pleasing  that  she  can 
subjugate.  She  is  not  resentful  or  spiteful,  because  she  despises 
those  around  her  too  much  to  waste  anger  on  them,  and  because 
she  know’s  that  petty  injuries  are  generally  repaid  with  interest. 
Her  estimate  of  herself  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  She  is 
visiting  at  a  sober  country-house,  in  which  she  formerly  lived 
as  a  governess. 

‘  One  day  followed  another,  and  the  ladies  of  the  house  passed  their 
life  in  those  calm  pursuits  and  amusements  which  satisfy  country 
ladies.  Rebecca  sung  Handel  and  Haydn  to  the  family  of  evenings, 
and  engaged  in  a  large  piece  of  worsted  work,  as  if  she  had  been  born 
to  the  business,  and  as  if  this  kind  of  life  was  to  continue  with  her 
until  she  should  sink  to  the  grave  in  a  polite  old  age,  leaving  regrets 


204 


Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

and  a  great  quantity  of  consols  behind  her,  —  as  if  there  were  not 
cares  and  duns,  scliemes,  shifts,  and  poverty  waiting  outside  the  Park 
gates  to  pounce  upon  her  when  she  issued  into  the  world  again. 

‘  “  It  isn’t  difficult  to  be  a  country  gentleman’s  wife,”  Rebecca 
thought ;  “  I  think  I  could  he  a  good  woman  if  I  had  live  thousand  a> 
year.  I  could  daw’dle  about  in  the  nursery,  and  count  the  apricots  on 
the  wall.  I  could  water  plants  in  a  green-house,  and  pick  off  dead 
leaves  from  the  geraniums ;  I  could  ask  old  women  about  their 
rheumatisms,  and  order  half-a-crown’s  worth  of  soup  for  the  poor ;  I 
shouldn’t  miss  it  much  out  of  five  thousand  a-year.  I  could  go  to 
church  and  keep  awake  in  the  great  family  pew ;  or  go  to  sleep 
behind  the  curtains,  and  with  my  veil  down,  if  I  only  had  practice. 

I  could  pay  everybody  if  I  had  but  the  money.”  ’ 

‘  The  old  haunts,  tlie  old  fields  and  woods,  the  copses,  ponds,  and 
gardens,  the  rooms  of  the  old  house  where  she  had  spent  a  couple  of 
years  seven  years  ago,  were  all  carefully  revisited  by  her.  She  had 
been  young  then,  or  comparatively  so,  for  she  forgot  the  time  when 
she  ever  was  young, — but  she  remembered  her  thoughts  and  feelings 
seven  years  back,  and  contrasted  them  with  those  which  she  had  at 
present,  now  that  she  had  seen  the  world  and  lived  with  great  people, 
and  raised  herself  far  beyond  her  original  humble  station. 

‘  “  I  have  passed  beyond  it  because  I  have  brains,’’  Becky  thought, 

“  and  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  world  are  fools.  I  could  not  go  back 
and  consort  with  those  people  now,  whom  I  used  to  meet  in  my 
father’s  studio.  Lords  come  up  to  my  door  with  stars  and  garters,  in¬ 
stead  of  poor  artists  with  screws  of  tobacco  in  their  pockets.  I  have 
a  gentleman  for  my  husband,  and  an  Earl’s  daughter  for  my  sister,  in 
the  very  house  where  I  was  little  better  than  a  servant  a  few  years 
ago.  But  am  I  much  better  to  do  now  in  the  world  than  I  was  when 
I  was  the  poor  painter’s  daughter,  and  wheedled  the  grocer  round  the 
corner  for  sugar  and  tea  ?  Suppose  I  had  married  Francis,  who  was 
so  fond  of  me,  I  couldn’t  have  been  much  poorer  than  I  am  now. 
Heigho  !  I  wish  I  could  exchange  my  position  in  society,  and  all  my 
relations  for  a  snug  run  in  the  three  per  cent,  consols.”  For  so  it  was 
that  Becky  felt  the  Vanity  of  human  affairs,  and  it  was  in  those  secu¬ 
rities  that  she  would  have  liked  to  cast  anchor.’  (Pp.  376,  377.) 

The  game  which  poor  Becky  plays  is,  from  its  outset,  almost  • 
a  hopeless  one:  it  is,  to  rise  in  the  world  without  money,  or  birth, 
or  connexions,  or  friends.  She  begins  it  at  seventeen ;  the  orphan, 
penniless  daughter  of  a  drunken,  unsuccessful  painter  and  a 
French  opera  girl.  Received  as  a  French  teacher  in  Miss  Pink¬ 
erton’s  school,  bored  by  the  pompous  vanity  of  the  mistress,  the 
silly  chat  and  scandal  and  quarrels  of  the  girls,  and  the  frigid, 
empty  correctness  of  the  governesses,  she  forms  her  habits  of 
unsympathising  self-existence.  She  6ghts  her  w’ay  to  be  a 
governess  in  Sir  Pitt  Crawley’s  family ;  and,  by  a  mixture  of 
wheedling,  coaxing,  flattering,  and  rallying  (described  with  as 
much  humour  as  it  is  conceived),  hooks  and  plays  with,  and  at 


1854. 


205 


Thackeray’s  Works'. 

length  lands,  her  first  spoil.  Captain  Rawdon  Crawley.  Her 
prize,  however,  resembles  the  gold  paid  by  the  magician  in  the 
Arabian  Nights,  which  turned  to  leaves  in  the  receiver’s  purse. 
Crawley’s  aunt,  disgusted  by  his  match,  burns  a  will  under  which 
he  was  to  have  inherited  50,000/. ;  and  Becky  finds  that  all  that 
she  has  gained  is  a  good-natured  husband,  overwhelmed  with  debt, 
with  no  property  but  his  commission  in  the  Life  Guards,  and  no 
knowledge  except  of  whist,  piquette,  and  billiards.  With  her  usual 
good  sense,  she  makes  the  most  of  her  unpromising  cards — goes 
with  the  regiment  to  Bmssels  —  turns  the  general  commanding 
the  division  into  her  slave — provides  victims  for  the  admirable 
play  of  her  husband — and  makes  him  the  happiest  of  mortals. 

‘  She  had  mastered  this  rude  coarse  nature,  and  he  loved  and 
worshipped  her  with  all  his  faculties  of  regard  and  admiration.  In 
all  his  life  he  had  never  been  so  happy  as,  during  the  past  few 
months,  his  wife  had  made  him.  She  had  known  perpetually  how 
to  divert  him,  and  he  had  found  his  house  and  her  society  a  thousand 
times  more  pleasant  than  any  place  or  company  which  he  had  ever 
frequented  from  his  childhood  until  now.  And  he  cursed  his  past 
follies  and  extravagances,  and  bemoaned  his  vast  outlying  debts, 
which  must  remain  for  ever  as  obstacles  to  prevent  his  wife’s 
advance. 

‘  Rebecca  always  knew  how  to  conjure  away  these  moods  of  me¬ 
lancholy.  “  Why,  my  stupid  love,”  she  would  say,  “  we  have  not 
done  with  your  aunt  yet.  If  she  fails  us,  isn’t  there  what  you  call 
the  Gazette  ?  or,  stop,  when  your  uncle  Bute’s  life  drops,  I  have 
another  scheme.  The  living  always  belonged  to  the  youngest  brother, 
and  why  shouldn’t  you  sell  out  and  go  into  the  Church?”  The  idea 
of  this  conversion  set  Rawdon  into  roars  of  laughter ;  you  might 
have  heard  the  explosion  through  the  hotel  at  midnight.  General 
Tufts  heard  it  from  his  quarters  in  the  first  floor ;  and  Rebecca  acted 
the  scene  with  great  spirit,  and  preached  Rawdon’s  first  sermon,  to 
the  immense  delight  of  the  General  at  breakfast.’  (Pp.  258,  259.) 

The  night  before  Quatre  Bras  comes.  Three  partings  are 
described.  The  first  is  that  between  Amelia  and  George 
Osborne. 

‘  On  arriving  at  his  quarters  from  the  ball,  George  found  his  regi¬ 
mental  servant  already  making  preparations  for  his  departure  ;  the 
man  had  understood  his  signal  to  be  still,  and  these  arrangements 
were  very  quickly  and  silently  made.  Should  he  go  in  and  wake 
Amelia,  he  thought,  or  leave  a  note  for  her  brother  to  break  the 
news  of  departure  to  her  ?  He  went  to  look  at  her  once  again. 

‘  She  had  been  awake  when  he  first  entered  her  room,  but  had  kept 
her  eyes  closed,  so  that  even  her  wakefulness  should  not  seem  to 
reproach  him.  But  when  he  had  returned,  so  soon  after  herself,  too, 
this  timid  little  heart  had  felt  more  at  ease,  and,  turning  towards  him 
as  he  stept  softly  out  of  the  room,  she  had  fallen  into  a  light  sleep. 


S06 


Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

‘  He  came  to  tlie  bed-side,  and  looked  at  the  hand,  the  little  soft 
hand,  lying  asleep  :  and  he  bent  over  the  pillow  noiselessly  towards 
the  gentle  pale  face. 

‘  Two  fair  arms  closed  tenderly  round  his  neck  as  he  stooped 
down.  “  I  am  awake,  George,”  the  poor  child  said,  with  a  sob  fit  to 
break  the  little  heart  that  nestled  so  closely  by  his  own.  She  was 
awake,  poor  soul,  and  to  what  ?  At  that  moment  a  bugle  from  the 
,  Place  of  Arms  began  sounding  clearly,  and  was  taken  up  through 
#  the  town  ;  and  amidst  the  drums  of  the  infantry,  and  the  shrill  pipes 
of  the  Scotch,  tlie  whole  city  awoke.’  (P.  256.) 

The  next  is  between  Major  O’Dowd,  who  commands  the 
regiment,  and  his  wife. 

‘  “  I’d  like  ye  wake  me  about  half  an  hour  before  the  assembly 
beats,”  the  Major  said  to  his  lady.  “  Call  me  at  half-past  one, 
Peggy,  dear,  and  see  me  things  is  ready.  May  be  I’ll  not  come  back 
to  breakfast,  Mrs.  O’D.”  With  which  words,  the  Major  ceased 
talking,  and  fell  asleep. 

‘  Mrs.  O’Dowd,  the  good  housewife,  arrayed  in  curl  papers  and  a 
camisole,  felt  that  her  duty  was  to  act,  and  not  to  sleep,  at  this 
juncture.  “Time  enough  for  that,”  she  said,  “when  Mick’s  gone;” 
and  so  she  packed  his  travelling-valise  ready  for  the  march,  brushed 
his  cloak,  his  cap,  and  other  warlike  habiliments,  set  them  out  in 
order  for  him ;  and  stowed  away  in  the  cloak  pockets  a  light  package 
of  portable  refreshments,  and  a  wicker  covered  flask  or  pocket-pistol, 
containing  near  a  pint  of  a  remarkably  sound  Cognac  brandy,  of 
which  she  and  the  Major  approved  very  much,  and  as  soon  as  the 
hands  of  the  “  repay ther”  pointed  to  half-past  one,  and  its  interior 
arrangements  (it  had  a  tone  quite  equal  to  a  cathay-dral  its  fair 
owner  considered)  knelled  forth  tliat  fatal  hour,  Mrs.  O’Dowd  woke 
up  her  Major,  and  had  as  comfortable  a  cup  of  coffee  prepared  for 
him  as  any  made  that  morning  in  Brussels.’  (Pp.  257,  258.) 

Last  comes  that  of  the  Crawleys. 

‘Rebecca,  as  w’e  have  said,  wisely  determined  not  to  give  way  to 
unavailing  sentimentality  on  her  husband’s  departure.  She  waved 
him  an  adieu  from  the  window,  and  stood  there  for  a  moment  looking 
out  after  he  was  gone,  'fhe  cathedral  towers  and  the  full  gables  of 
the  quaint  old  houses  were  just  beginning  to  blush  in  the  sunrise. 
There  had  been  no  rest  for  her  that  night.  She  was  still  in  her 
pretty  ball  dress,  her  fair  hair  hanging  somewhat  out  of  curl  on  her 
neck,  and  the  circles  round  her  eyes  dark  with  watching.  “  What  a 
fright  T  seem,”  she  said,  examining  herself  in  the  glass,  “  and  how  pale 
this  pink  makes  one  look  !”  So  she  divested  herself  of  this  pink 
raiment ;  in  doing  which  a  note  fell  out  from  her  corsage,  which  she 
picked  up  with  a  smile,  and  locked  into  her  dressing-box.  And  then 
she  put  her  bouquet  of  the  ball  into  a  glass  of  water,  and  went  to 
bed,  and  slept  very  comfortably. 

‘  The  town  was  quite  quiet  when  she  woke  up  at  ten  o’clock,  and 


1854.  Thackeray’s  Works.  207 

partook  of  coffee,  very  requisite  and  comfortable  after  the  exhaustion 
and  grief  of  the  morning’s  occurrences. 

‘  This  meal  over,  she  surveyed  her  position.  Should  the  worst 
befal,  all  things  considered,  she  was  pretty  well  to  do.  There  were 
her  own  trinkets  and  trousseau,  in  addition  to  those  which  her 
husband  had  left  behind.  Besides  these,  and  the  little  mare,  the 
General,  her  slave  and  worshipper,  had  made  her  many  very  hand¬ 
some  presents,  in  the  shape  of  cashmere  shawls  bought  at  the  auc¬ 
tion  of  a  bankrupt  French  general’s  lady,  and  numerous  tributes 
from  the  jewellers’  shops,  all  of  which  betokened  her  admirer’s  taste 
and  wealth. 

‘  Every  caleulation  made  of  these  valuables,  Mrs.  Rebecca  found,  not 
without  a  pungent  feeling  of  triumph  and  self-satisfaction,  that  should 
circumstances  occur,  she  might  reckon  on  six  or  seven  hundred 
pounds,  at  the  very  least,  to  begin  the  world  with  :  and  she  passed 
the  morning  disposing,  ordering,  looking  out,  and  locking  up  her 
properties  in  the  most  agreeable  manner.  If  this  is  a  novel  without 
a  hero,  at  least  let  us  lay  claim  to  a  heroine.  No  man  in  the  British 
jirmy  which  has  marched  away,  not  the  great  duke  himself,  could  be 
more  cool  or  collected  in  the  presence  of  doubts  and  difficulties,  than 
the  indomitable  little  aide-de-camp’s  wife.’  (Pp.  260,  261,  262.) 

In  a  year  or  two  w'e  find  Becky  in  London,  having  achieved 
the  perilous  enterprise  of  scaling  the  heights  of  fashion ;  but  she 
finds  them  neither  secure  nor  amusing. 

‘  Becky’s  former  acquaintances  hated  and  envied  her  :  the  poor 
woman  herself  was  yawning  in  spirit.  “  I  wish  I  were  out  of  it,” 
she  said  to  herself.  “  I  would  rather  be  a  parson’s  wife,  and  teach 
a  Sunday  School,  than  this ;  or  a  sergeant’s  lady  and  ride  in  the 
regimental  waggon ;  or  0 !  how  much  gayer  it  would  be  to  wear 
spangles  and  trousers,  and  dance  before  a  booth  at  a  fair.” 

‘  “  You  would  do  it  very  well,”  said  Lord  Steyne,  laughing.  She 
used  to  tell  the  great  man  her  ennuis  and  perplexities  in  her  artless 
way — tliey  amused  him. 

‘  In  her  commerce  with  the  great,  our  dear  friend  showed  the 
same  frankness  which  distinguished  her  transactions  with  the  lowly 
in  station.  On  one  occasion,  when  out  at  a  very  fine  house,  Rebecca 
was  (perhaps  rather  ostentatiously)  holding  a  conversation  in  the 
French  language  with  a  celebrated  tenor  singer  of  that  nation,  wffiile 
the  Lady  Grizzel  Macbeth  looked  over  her  shoulder  scowling  at  the 
pair. 

‘  “  How  very  well  you  speak  French,”  Lady  Grizzel*  said,  who  her¬ 
self  spoke  the  tongue  in  an  Edinburgh  accent  most  remarkable  to 
hear.  “  I  ought  to  know  it,”  Becky  modestly  said,  casting  down  her 
eyes.  “  I  taught  it  in  a  school,  and  my  mother  was  a  French¬ 
woman.” 

‘  Lady  Grizzel  was  won  by  her  humility,  and  w’as  mollified 
towards  the  little  woman.  She  deplored  the  fatal  levelling  tendencies 
of  the  age,  which  admitted  persons  of  all  classes  into  the  society  of 


208 


1 


Thackeray’s  IVorks.  Jan. 

their  superiors;  but  her  ladyship  owned,  that  this  one  at  least  was 
well  behaved,  and  never  forgot  her  place  in  life. 

‘  How  the  Crawleys  pot  the  money  which  was  spent  upon  the 
entertainments  with  which  they  treated  the  polite  world,  was  a 
mystery  which  gave  rise  to  some  conversation  at  the  time,  and  pro¬ 
bably  added  zest  to  these  little  festivities.  Who  knows  what  stories 
were  or  were  not  told  of  our  dear  and  innocent  friend  ?  Certain  it 
is,  that  if  she  had  had  all  the  money  which  she  was  said  to  have 
begged,  or  borrowed,  or  stolen,  she  might  have  capitalised  and  been 
honest  for  life,  whereas,  —  but  this  is  advancing  matters.  The  truth 
is,  tliat  by  economy  and  good  management — by  a  sparing  use  of 
ready  money,  and  by  paying  scarcely  anybody — people  can  manage, 
for  a  time  at  least,  to  make  a  great  show  with  very  little  means :  and 
it  is  our  belief,  that  Becky’s  much-talked-of  parties,  which  were  not, 
after  all  that  was  said,  very  numerous,  cost  this  lady  very  little  more 
than  the  wax  candles  which  lighted  the  walls.  Stillbrook  supplied 
her  with  game  and  fruit  in  abundance.  Lord  Steyne’s  cellar  was  at 
her  disposal,  and  that  excellent  nobleman’s  famous  cooks  presided 
over  her  little  kitchen,  or  sent  by  my  lord’s  order  the  rarest  delicacies 
from  their  own.  I  protest  it  is  quite  shifmeful  in  the  world  to  abuse 
a  simple  creature,  as  people  of  her  time  abuse  Becky,  and  I  warn  the 
public  against  believing  one-tenth  of  the  stories  against  her.’  (Pp.  453. 
454,  455.) 

If  Becky  could  have  changed  sexes  with  her  husband,  all 
would  have  gone  well.  She  might  have  canvassed  a  borough 
as  a  Radical,  and  a  county  as  a  Tory — might  have  gained  the  ear 
of  the  House  by  malignity,  and  kept  it  by  effrontery  —  might 
have  risen  into  notoriety  by  attacking  the  first  men  of  the  age, 
and  have  become  the  leader  of  a  party  by  joining  one  which  all 
persons  of  sense  had  deserted.  But  she  is  a  woman  ;  she  can 
establish  herself  only  through  her  husband ;  and  her  husband 
has  neither  talents,  nor  knowledge,  nor  character.  Her  only 
resource  is  to  treat  him  as  damaged  goods  generally  are  treated 
—  to  export  him  to  the  colonies.  It  is  an  awful  job  ;  but  her 
friend  Lord  Steyne  is  all-powerful.  Such  things,  however,  are 
not  to  be  got  for  nothing,  and  poor  Becky  has  only  one  means 
of  paying  for  them. 

Unhappily,  on  the  very  night  that  the  gazette  is  being  printed 
which  announces  that  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  appoint 
Colonel  Crawley,  C.  B.,  to  be  the  Governor  of  Coventry  Island, 
Crawley  discovers  what  was  the  nature  of  the  contract  by  which 
his  preferment  was  obtained.  He  knocks  down  his  patron, 
publishes  his  wife’s  shame,  separates  himself  from  her  for  ever, 
and  goes  out  to  administer  Swamp  Town. 

Mr.  Thackeray  has  not  made  Becky’s  downward  course  as 
entertaining  as  her  rise.  Indeed,  it  was  impossible.  No  series 
of  events  can  amuse,  or,  what  is  a  much  easier  thing,  can  interest. 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


209 


unless  we  can  sympathise  in  some  respects  with  the  principal 
tigent.  Even  in  tragedy,  the  most  atrocious  villain  is  generally 
invested  by  the  poet  with  some  qualities  which  we  admire  and 
even  love.  Richard  the  Third,  lago,  and  Lovelace,  perhaps  the 
most  hateful  of  poetical  heroes,  possess  in  the  highest  degree  wit, 
sagacity,  courage,  and  decision.  Tears,  such  as  angels  weep, 
burst  forth  from  Satan.  Now,  in  Becky’s  earlier  career,  though 
there  was  more  to  hate,  there  was  much  to  admire,  and  some¬ 
thing  to  like.  The  reader  thoroughly  sympathised  with  her 
scorn  of  fools,  however  highly  placed ;  with  the  intrepidity  with 
which  she  encountered  insolence,  and  the  dexterity  with  which 
she  repelled  it ;  with  her  spirit  in  danger,  her  resources  in  diffi¬ 
culty,  and  the  gay  vivacity  which  was  spread  like  sunshine  over 
her  whole  demeanour.  He  was  amused  even  by  the  impudence 
of  her  vanity,  and  the  breadth  and  boldness  of  her  mendacity. 
It  is  difficult  to  avoid  sympathising  with  the  success  of  schemes 
so  magnificently  planned  and  so  audaciously  carried  out.  It  is 
not  Fortune  alone  that  favours  the  bold.  All  the  world  follows 
Fortune’s  example. 

But  with  her  success  all  the  charm  of  Becky  disappears.  Even 
Mr.  Thackeray  turns  his  back  upon  her.  He  no  longer  supplies 
her  with  the  sagacity  and  presence  of  mind  which  carried  her 
triumphantly  through  the  storms  and  among  the  quicksands  of 
her  London  life.  He  allows  her  to  sink  from  degradation  to 
degradation,  without  an  effort  on  his  part,  or  even  on  hers,  to 
extricate  her,  until  she  loses  her  identity,  and  the  brilliant 
Rebecca  turns  into  a  vulgar  swindler.  At  length,  he  seems  to 
relent,  and  to  take  pity  on  the  distresses  of  an  old  acquaintance 
who  has  afforded  so  much  amusement.  He  throws  Amelia  and 
her  brother  across  her  path,  and  gives  up  to  her  the  rich  Joseph 
as  a  prey.  And  here  we  think  her  changes  ought  to  have  ended. 
As  the  ruler,  and,  as  soon  as  the  climate  of  Coventry  Island 
rendered  her  a  widow,  the  wife,  of  Joseph  Sedley,  she  might 
have  passed  the  tranquil,  decorous  middle  age  to  which  he  at 

length  dismisses  her,  —  ‘  busied  in  works  of  piety ;  going  to 

*  church,  and  never  without  a  footman  ;  the  subscriber  to  every 

*  charity ;  the  fast  friend  of  the  destitute  orange  girl,  the  neg- 

*  lected  washerwoman,  and  the  distressed  muffinman ;  a  pa- 

*  troness  and  stall-keeper  in  every  benevolent  bazaar  in  Chel- 

*  tenham  and  Bath.’  Instead  of  this,  he  blackens  her  with  the 
vulgar  commonplace  crimes  of  making  Sedley’s  will  in  her 
favour,  insuring  his  life,  and  poisoning  him. 

Tills  we  venture  to  think  a  mistake.  Comic  characters  are 
intended  to  amuse,  not  to  frighten.  They  may  be  as  vicious  as 

the  author  pleases;  they  may  be  utterly  heartless,  they  may 

VOL.  XCIX.  KO.  CCI.  P 


210  Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

swindle,  they  may  rob ;  but  they  must  not  kill  The  extent  to 
which  tragi-comedy  is  allowable  may  be  undefined ;  but  this  we 
think  is  clear,  namely,  that  the  comedy  must  be  an  accessory  to 
the  traaedy,  not  the  tragedy  to  the  comedy.  The  intermixture 
of  a  few  cheerful  spots  among  gloomy  or  frightful  scenes  is  felt 
as  a  relief.  The  intrusion  of  the  terrible  among  gay  images  is 
an  interruption.  It  is  like  a  gibbet  as  the  background  of  a 
Watteau.  We  are  pleased  to  enjoy  a  respite  from  the  con¬ 
tinued  contemplation  of  suffering  or  danger.  We  are  shocked  at 
being  disturbed  in  our  laughter  by  wailings  and  screams.  All 
Sbakspeare’s  tragedies  have  a  mixture  of  comedy ;  none  of  his 
comedies  contmn  any  thing  that  is  tragic.  Hotspur,  Henry  the 
Fifth,  and  Richard  are  tragic.  Their  powers  for  good  and  for 
evil  are  gigantic ;  the  fate  of  kingdoms  depends  on  them.  They 
can  afford  to  trifle;  their  wit  and  humour,  though  sometimes 
pushed  to  buflbonery,  does  not  lower  them.  Richard  may  smile, 
because  he  can  murder  while  he  smiles.  But  what  should  we 
think  of  Shakspeare  if  he  had  made  Falstaflf  an  assassin,  or 
bad  engaged  Shallow,  Slender,  and  Poins  in  a  murderous  conspi¬ 
racy  ?  Hatred  is  to  most  men  a  painful  emotion.  There  are 
undoubtedly  torpid  dispositions  which  require  strong  excitement, 
which  enjoy  pictures  of  murderers,  tyrants,  and  oppressors  just 
as  they  enjoy  the  taste  of  garlic,  and  the  smell  of  tobacco ;  but 
these  coarse  intellectual  palates  are  rare.  In  most  minds  the 
indignation  produced  by  the  description  of  great  crimes  requires 
to  be  soothed  by  the  exemplary  punishment  of  the  offender,  or 
to  be  diverted  by  withdrawing  from  him  the  reader’s  attention, 
and  fixing  it  on  the  heroism  of  the  sufferer,  on  the  courage  with 
which  he  resists  violence,  or  on  the  patience  with  which  he  bears 
it.  But  these  are  the  materials  of  tragedy ;  and  when  they  are 
introduced  into  a  work  of  which  the  basis  is  comic,  they  recall 
us  painfully  from  the  sunny  scenes  among  which  we  have  been 
wandering  to  the  gloomy  regions  of  danger  and  endurance. 

Though  we  have  left  more  than  half  the  characters  in  Vanity 
Fair  unnoticed,  our  review  of  it  has  extended  to  almost  an  un¬ 
warrantable  length.  Our  defence  is,  that  we  have  been  review¬ 
ing  one  of  the  most  remarkable  books  of  this  age — a  work  which 
is  as  sure  of  immortality  as  ninety-nine  hundredths  of  modem 
novels  are  sure  of  annihilation. 

Pendennis  has  generally  been  thought  inferior  to  Vanity 
Fair,  and  we  are  not  inclined  to  dispute  the  verdict  of  the  public. 
It  wants  the  grand  historical  background  of  Vanity  Fair.  Mr. 
Thackeray  never  was  more  happily  inspired  than  when  he  re¬ 
moved  his  theatre  to  Belgium.  Every  reader  will  admit  that 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


211 


the  events  in  Brussels  are  those  which  are  the  most  strongly 
imprinted  on  his  memory.  Every  one  recollects,  as  well  as  if 
he  had  witnessed  them,  the  perplexities  of  Lady  Bareacres,  the 
undaunted  self-possession  of  Becky,  and  the  terrors  of  Joseph 
Sedley.  But  it  is  not  merely  to  the  exquisite  truth  with  which 
these  scenes  are  imagined  that  they  owe  their  apparent  reality.' 
The  solid  foundation  of  fact  by  which  all  that  is  invention  is 
supported,  gives  to  it  a  stability  which  no  pure  fictions  can 
possess.  W  e  know  that  thousands  must  have  been  startled  at 
their  mid-day  meal,  like  Sedley  and  Mrs.  O’Dowd  by  the  dull 
distant  mutterings  of  Quatre  Bras.  We  know  that  tens  of 
thousands  felt  Amelia’s  terrors  when  the  cannon  of  Waterloo 
began  to  roar.  Every  ScotchYnan  who  visited  the  British 
Institution  last  year,  and  admired  Drummond’s  charming  picture 
of  John  Knox  bringing  home  his  second  wife,  felt  what  pro¬ 
bability  was  given  to  its  imaginary  details  by  the  curious  gable 
ends  and  projecting  windows  and  outside  staircase  of  the  still 
existing  bouse  at  the  head  of  the  Netherbow,  which  the  serious 
bridal  procession  is  reaching. 

It  has  been  objected  to  the  historical  novel  that  it  carries 
untruth  on  the  face  of  it.  First,  because  we  already  know  all 
that  can  be  known  of  the  departed  great,  and  feel  that  any 
additional  actions  or  speeches  must  be  attributed  to  them  falsely. 
And  secondly,  because  the  reader  has  always  formed  to  himself 
a  conception  of  the  language  and  conduct  of  every  historical 
person  in  whom  he  is  interested,  and  is  disgusted  when  the 
author’s  conception  of  them  differs,  as  it  almost  always  must, 
from  his  own. 

There  is  much  foundation  for  these  objections,  and  Mr. 
Thackeray,  in  Vanity  Fair,  has  skilfully  avoided  them,  by  ex¬ 
cluding  from  his  novel  historical  characters,  though  he  admits 
historical  events.  He  has  not  given  us  a  sketch,  or  even  a  side 
view,  of  any  actor  in  the  great  drama  of  1815,  whose  name  was 
ever  heard  of  before.  Isidor  and  Pauline,  and  the  O’Dowds  and 
B(^lus,  are  all  the  delightful  creations  of  the  author.  But  we 
know  that  there  must  have  been  such  persons  in  Brussels  in 
June  1815,  that  they  must  have  witnessed  the  wonders  of  that 
memorable  month,  and  that  they  must  have  talked  and  acted 
in  the  same  manner,  though  not  quite  so  amusingly,  as  their 
representatives  are  made  to  do  in  the  pages  of  Vanity  Fair. 
Kow  all  this  is  wanting  in  Pendenuis.  As  far  as  can  be  in- 
fen-ed  from  any  historical  allusions,  it  might  have  been  written 
at  any  time  during  the  present,  or  indeed  during  the  last  cen¬ 
tury.  The  old  and  the  young,  the  Londoners  and  the  provincials, 
all  act  and  talk  as  if  the  fortunes  of  the  country  had  no  con- 


212 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


nexion  with  theirs.  Even  the  professional  W’riters  deal  with 
politics  with  the  impartiality  of  indifference.  They  put  one  in 
mind  of  Chatterton’s  computation  on  a  ^eat  man’s  death. 

‘  Lost  by  not  being  able  to  dedicate  to  him,  ten  guineas. 

*  Gained  by  writing  his  life,  12/.  Ain  glad  he  is  dead,  by 

*  thirty  shillings.’ 

Pendennis  is  further  distinguished  from  Vanity  Fair  by 
possessing  a  hero.  Arthur  Pendennis,  who  fills  that  office,  is 
the  only  child  of  a  retired  apothecary,  of  an  old  but  reduced 
family.  He  loses  his  father  at  sixteen,  and  from  that  time  is 
educated,  or  rather  supported,  under  the  care  of  a  weak,  affec¬ 
tionate  mother,  one  of  the  tender,  generous  incapables  whom 
Mr.  Thackeray  delights  in  painting,  because  he  paints  them 
well.  He  lives  at  home  with  her  and  a  nominal  tutor ;  falls  in 
love  with  an  actress,  who  jilts  him  when  she  finds  that  he  has 
nothing  in  possession,  and  only  500/.  a  year  in  prospect;  and 
is  removed  to  the  University,  where  he  becomes  a  fast  young 
man,  runs  in  debt,  and  is  plucked.  He  retires  to  his  native 
village,  lives  idly  with  his  mother  and  his  cousin  (the  good 
heroine  of  the  piece),  after  some  love  passages,  takes  refuge  in 
the  Temple  as  a  law-student,  is  disgusted  by  the  study,  and 
adopts  literature  as  a  profession.  He  succeeds  as  a  magazine 
writer,  novelist,  and  minor  poet ;  and  partly  as  a  litterateur ^  and 
partly  through  the  patronage  of  his  uncle,  an  antiquated  beau, 
gets  admission  into  the  world  of  fashion.  His  mother’s  death 
puts  him  in  possession  of  his  patrimony,  and  after  some  more 
abortive  love-making  he  marries  his  cousin,  and  settles  in  the 
country. 

Along  this  not  very  interesting  biography  is  strung  a  garland 
of  portraits  and  incidents,  conceived  with  Mr.  Thackeray’s 
wonderful  fertility  of  invention,  and  executed  with  his  equally 
wonderful  mastery  of  outline  and  colour. 

One  of  the  most  amusing  of  these  portraits  is  the  actress, 
Pendennis’s  juvenile  flame  —  Miss  Costigan,  or,  to  use  her  nom 
de  theatre,  the  Fotheringay.  Mr.  Thackeray  gives  to  her  a 
splendid  person, — after  the  model  of  Gibson’s  Puella  Capuana, 
whom  indeed  she  resembles  intellectually, — industry,  good  sense, 
and  good  tendencies,  but  absolutely  no  imagination,  and  there¬ 
fore  the  torpidity  of  feeling  which  generally  follows  from 
that  defect.  She  has  taken  to  the  stage  as  the  best  means  of 
supporting  herself  and  her  drunken  Irish  father ;  accepts  blindly 
the  instructions  of  one  Bows,  a  clever  dramatic  teacher,  the 
leader  of  the  orchestra ;  practises  them  with  unremitting  dili¬ 
gence,  and  becomes,  in  the  parts  which  she  has  thus  studied,  a 
fine  actress  from  pure  memory.  The  courtship  is  emiueutly 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


213 


entertaining;  but  still  more  so  its  conclusion,  when  Captain 
Costigan  discovers  and  exposes  to  his  daughter  the  real  circum¬ 
stances  of  Pendennis. 

The  interlocutors  are  the  father  and  daughter  and  Bows,  a 
hump-backed  little  old  man,  who,  it  must  be  recollected,  is 
himself  in  love  with  the  Fotheringay. 

“‘0  Emilee!”  cried  the  Captain,  “  that  boy  whom  I  loved  as  the 
boy  of  mee  bosom  is  only  a  scoundthrel,  and  a  deceiver,  mee  poor 
girl and  he  looked  in  the  roost  tragical  way  at  Mr.  Bows,  opposite ; 
who,  in  his  turn,  gazed  somewhat  anxiously  at  Miss  Costigan. 

‘  “  He !  pooh  !  Sure  the  poor  lad’s  as  simple  as  a  schoolboy,”  she 
said.  “  All  them  children  write  verses  and  nonsense.” 

“‘He’s  been  acting  the  part  of  a  viper  to  this  fireside,  and  a 
traitor  in  this  familee,”  cried  the  Captain.  “  1  tell  ye  he’s  no  better 
then  an  impostor.’’ 

‘  “What  has  the  poor  fellow  done,  papa  ?”  asked  Emily. 

‘  “  Done  ?  He  has  deceived  me  in  the  most  athrocious  manner,”  Miss 
Emily’s  papa  said.  “  He  has  trifled  with  your  alTections,  and  outraged 
my  own  fine  feelings.  He  has  represented  himself  as  a  man  of  pro¬ 
perty,  and  it  tuoruns  out  that  he  is  no  betther  than  a  beggar.  Haven’t 
1  often  told  ye  he  had  two  thousand  a  year  ?  He’s  a  pauper,  I  tell 
ye.  Miss  Costigan :  a  depindent  upon  the  bountee  of  his  mother,  a 
good  woman,  who  may  marry  again,  who’s  likely  to  live  for  ever,  and 
who  has  but  five  hundred  a  year.” 

‘  Milly  looked  very  grave  and  thoughtful,  rubbing  with  bread 
crumb  a  pair  of  ex-white  satin  shoes,  intending  to  go  mad  upon  them 
next  Tuesday  in  Ophelia.  “  Sure  if  he’s  no  money,  there’s  no  use 
marrying  him,  papa,”  she  said  sententiously. 

‘  “  Why  did  the  villain  say  he  was  a  man  of  prawpertee?”  asked 
Costigan. 

‘  “  The  poor  fellow  always  said  he  was  poor,”  answered  the  girl. 
“’Twas  you  would  have  it  he  was  rich,  papa, — and  made  me  agree  to 
take  him.” 

‘  “  He  should  have  been  explicit  and  told  us  his  income,  Milly,” 
answered  the  father.  “  A  young  fellow  who  rides  a  blood  mare,  and 
makes  presents  of  shawls  and  bracelets,  is  an  impostor  if  he  has  no 
money.” 

‘  “  And  so  poor  Arthur  has  no  money  ?  ”  sighed  out  Miss 
Costigan,  rather  plaintively.  “  Poor  lad,  he  was  a  good  lad  too : 
wild  and  talking  nonsense,  with  his  verses  and  pothry  and  that,  but  a 
brave,  generous  boy,  and  indeed  I  liked  him  —  and  he  liked  me  too,” 
she  added,  rather  softly,  and  rubbing  away  at  the  shoe. 

‘  “  Why  don’t  you  marry  him  if  you  like  him  so  ?  ”  Mr.  Bows  said, 
rather  savagely.  “  He  is  not  more  than  ten  years  younger  than  you 
are.  His  mother  may  relent,  and  you  might  go  and  live  and  have 
enough  at  Fairoaks  Park.  Why  not  go  and  be  a  lady  ?  1  could  go 

on  with  the  fiddle,  and  the  General  live  on  his  half-pay.  Why  don’t 
you  marry  him  ?  You  know  he  likes  you.” 


214 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


‘  “  There’s  others  that  likes  me  as  well,  Bows,  that  has  no  money, 
and  that’s  old  enougli,”  Miss  Milly  said. 

‘  “  Yes,  d - it,”  said  Bows,  with  a  bitter  curse  —  “that  are  old 

enough  and  poor  enough  and  fools  enough  for  anything.” 

‘  “  There’s  old  fools,  and  young  fools  too.  You’ve  often  said  so, 
you  silly  man,”  the  imperious  beauty  said,  with  a  conscious  glance  at 
the  old  gentibmau.  “  If  Pendennis  has  not  enough  money  to  live 
upon,  it’s  fully  to  talk  about  marrying  him  :  and  that’s  the  long  and 
short  of  it.”’  (Vol.  i.  pp.  109,  110,  111.) 

The  contrast  between  the  humdrum  !Miss  Costigan  and  the 
impassioned  Fotheringay  is  most  amusing ;  but  in  justice  to  the 
charming  profession  to  which  she  belongs,  we  feel  bound  to 
express  some  doubt  whether  really  fine  acting  can  be  the  result 
of  mere  memory  and  unintelligent  imitation.  There  are  indeed 
great  authorities  in  Mr.  Thackeray’s  favour.  Jcdinson  said 
of  Pritchard,  that  she  was  a  vulgar  idiot,  that  her  playing  was 
quite  mechanical,  and  that  she  no  more  thought  of  reading  the 
^y  out  of  which  her  part  was  taken  than  a  shoemaker  thinks 
of  the  skin  out  of  which  the  piece  of  leather  of  which  he  is 
making  a  pair  of  shoes  is  cut.  And  Diderot  has  written  an 
essay  to  prove  that  perfect  self-possession  and  cold  insensibility 
to  the  emotions  which  he  represents  are  essential  to  a  great  actor: 

*  Such  an  actor,’  he  says,  *  is  the  same  in  every  representa- 
‘  tion,  and  always  equally  perfect.  All  is  prepared,  all  is  learned 

*  by  heart.  His  passion  has  its  beginning,  its  middle,  and  its 
‘  end.  The  same  accents,  the  same  positions,  the  same  gestures 
‘  are  repeated.  If  there  be  any  difference,  the  last  representa- 

*  tion,  being  the  most  studied,  is  the  best.  ‘  You  ask  me,* 
he  continues,  ‘  whether  these  plaintive  tones,  these  half-stifled 

*  sobs,  in  which  a  despairing  mother  seems  to  pour  forth  her 
'inmost  soul,  can  be  the  result  of  no  real  emotion?  Un- 
‘  questionably,  I  answer ;  and  the  proof  is,  that  they  form 

*  part  of  a  system  of  declamation — that  they  have  been  ela- 
‘  borated  by  long  study — that  to  be  properly  uttered  they 

*  have  been  repeated  a  hundred  times  —  that  every  time  the 

*  actor  listened  to  his  own  voice — that  he  is  listening  to  it  now 

*  — and  that  his  skill  consists  not  in  feeling  an  emotion,  but  in 

*  imitating  its  external  signs.  Those  screams  of  grief  are  noted 
‘  in  his  memory ;  those  gestures  of  despair  have  been  laboriously 

*  prepared.  He  has  fixed  in  his  own  mind  the  precise  time 
'  when  he  is  to  weep.  This  trembling  voice,  these  half-uttered, 

*  half-stifled  words,  these  quivering  limbs,  these  trembling  kneea 
* — all  is  pure  memory,  a  lesson  carefully /learned  and  accu- 
'  rately  repeated ;  a  sublime  deception,  which  the  actor  knows 
'  to  be  a  deception  while  be  is  executing  it ;  which  wearies  his 


1854. 


215 


Thackeray’a  Works. 

*body,  but  does  not  disturb  his  mind.’ — Correspondanee  Litte- 
raire  de  Grimmet  Diderot,  Oct.  1770. 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  a  French  tragedy 
differs  essentially  from  the  dramatic  representation  which  goes 
by  that  name  in  England.  So  much  so,  that  in  the  essay  from 
which  we  have  been  quoting,  Diderot  admits  that  a  man  who 
can  act  Shakspeare  perfectly,  is  in  all  probability  absolutely 
incapable  of  rendering  Racine,  *  ne  salt  pas  le  premier  mot  de 
*  la  declamation  d’une  scene  de  Racine.’  It  is  probable  that 
things  so  different  as  French  and  English  acting  may  require  . 
different  habits  of  mind,  and  different  modes  of  study  and  execu¬ 
tion;  and  that  the  long  tirades  of  Phedre  may  be  best  declaimed 
by  an  actor  who  Is  really  Indifferent,  and  merely  simulates  pas¬ 
sion,  while  the  rapid  natural  dialogue  of  Shakspeare  must  be  felt 
in  order  to  be  adequately  expressed.  And  absolutely  without 
denying  the  possibility  of  the  mechanical  acting  of  Pritchard 
and  Miss  Costigan,  wc  must  affirm  also  the  compatibility  of  the 
deepest  real  emotion  with  the  most  vivid  representation  of  it. 
Every  one  who  had  the  happiness  to  be  in  the  stage  box  when 
Jenny  Lind  pulled  to  pieces  the  rose  in  the  Sonnambula,  saw 
real  tears  running  down  her  cheeks.  And  it  is  known  that  she 
declared  that  when  on  the  stage  she  never  saw  the  audience. 
And  that  if  she  ever  thought  of  their  presence  it  spoiled  the 
truth  of  her  acting.  All  the  great  performers  that  occur  to  our 
recollection  have  enjoyed  the  dangerous  privil^es,  and  have 
been  subject  to  the  painful  joys,  of  the  poetic  temperament. 

'  One  of  the  most  finished  portraits  is  that  of  the  gentlemanlike 
parasite  Major  Pendennis.  Perhaps  we  ought  rather  to  call 
him  a  tuft-hunter  than  a  parasite.  That  word  is  generally 
used  to  signify  a  man  who  fawns  on  the  rich  fur  a  subsistence. 
Now  this  Major  Pendennis  does  not.  His  object  is  not  a  sub- 
astence,  the  means  which  he  uses  are  not  fawning,  nor  is  mere 
money  the  object  of  his  adoration.  He  despises  vulgar  untitled 
opulence  as  much  as  he  does  vulgar  untitled  genius.  His  idol 
is  not  wealth,  but  fashion.  To  a  certain  extent  his  worship  is 
disinterested ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  paid  to  his  patrons  for  their 
own  sakes.  He  desires  from  them  no  favour  except  to  be  re¬ 
ceived  into  their  society.  He  suns  himself  in  the  eyes  of  a  man 
of  fashion  like  a  lover  in  those  of  his  mistress.  This  state  of 
feeling,  familiar  as  it  is  to  us,  seems  to  have  been  unknown  to 
the  Greeks  and  to  the  Romans.  The  classical  parasite  was  in 
search  of  something  solid.  He  cringed  for  a  dinner  or  a 
sportula,  and  cared  little  for  the  degradation  by  which  he  ob¬ 
tained  them.  Gross  flattery  was  his  readiest  instrument,  and 
as  that  was  most  palatable  to  the  vulgarest  minds,  the  vulgarest 


216  Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

of  the  rich  were  those  to  whom  he  was  most  desirous  to  pay- 
court. 

The  objects  of  the  modem  tuft-hunter  are  less  substantial. 
The  values  for  which  he  barters  his  independence  are,  to  use  the 
language  of  political  economy,  immaterial.  Familiarity  with 
the  great  is,  with  him,  not  the  means  but  the  end.  All  that  he 
asks  from  them  is  their  acquaintance.  All  the  use  that  he 
makes  of  the  acquaintance  of  one  is  to  serve  as  a  passport  to 
that  of  another.  In  a  society  so  vast  and  so  changing  as  that 
of  the  English  aristocracy,  this  pursuit,  when  adopted  by  a  man 
who  begins  from  the  bottom,  has  the  great  advantage  of  being 
inexhaustible.  He  may  grow  old,  as  Major  Pendennis  does, 
in  a  constant  process  of  climbing  and  balancing  himself;  some- 
times  rising  a  little  higher,  sometimes  falling  a  little  back ;  one 
day  making  good  a  lodgment  in  a  new  great  house,  another 
losing  a  valuable  entree  by  the  death,  or  the  ruin,  or  the  caprice 
of  the  governor  of  the  fortress — until  at  length  he  closes  a  long 
life,  diligently  and  successfully  employed,  without  a  friend  or 
even  an  intimate,  without  having  done  anything,  or  written 
anything,  or  said  anything  that  can  be  remembered,  but  the 
undoubted  possessor  of  a  visiting  list  great  in  its  quantity  and 
irreproachable  in  its  quality. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed  that  a  successful  tuft- 
hunter  cannot  be  a  commonplace  man, 

*  Principibus  placuisse  viris  non  ultima  laus  est.* 

As  he  succeeds  by  pleasing,  he  must  possess  the  arts  of  pleasing. 
And  as  he  has  to  exercise  them  upon  persons  whom  familiarity 
with  the  most  cultivated  society  has  rendered  fastidious,  he 
must  possess  those  arts  in  an  eminent  degree.  He  must  have 
good  manners  and  considerable  education ;  he  must  talk  well 
and  listen  well.  He  must  enjoy  a  good  temper,  or  be  able  to 
control  a  bad  one.  All  these  qudities  Mr.  Thackeray  has  given 
to  the  Major,  and  he  has  added  to  them  courage,  decision,  pre¬ 
sence  of  mind,  and  sagacity.  And  yet  Major  Pendennis  does 
not  obtain,  and  is  not  intended  to  obtain,  our  esteem.  The 
frivolousness  of  the  purposes  for  which  they  are  employed, 
makes  his  talents  and  •  even  his  virtues  contemptible.  The 
reader  cannot  respect  a  man  who  does  not  respect  himself,  whose 
self-esteem  depends  altogether  on  the  verdict  of  others,  who  is 
content  to  shine  with  borrowed  light  and  to  be  splendid  in 
borrowed  plumes. 

Mr.  Thackeray  has  usually  two  heroines,  a  good  one  and  a  bad 
one ;  one  to  refuse  the  hero,  the  other  to  marry  him.  The  bad 
heroine  of  Pendennis,  Miss  Blanche  Amory,  is  a  picture  of 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


217 


great  merit,  even  taken  alone,  but  still  more  when  compared 
and  contrasted  with  her  predecessor,  Becky  Sharp.  At  first 
sight  the  features  appear  to  be  the  same.  Both  are  utterly 
heartless,  both  are  utterly  unscrupulous.  The  ruling  passion  of 
each  is  vanity,  and  each  pursues  her  objects  without  the  slightest 
regard  to  the  rights,  or  the  wishes,  or  the  feelings  of  any  one  else. 
Each  is  clever  and  accomplished.  They  look,  in  short,  at  a  dis> 
tance,  like  twins.  And  yet,  when  we  come  to  examine  the 
details  of  the  conduct  of  each  of  them,  we  find  them  not  merely 
dissimilar  but  contrasted.  Becky  is  a  universal  favourite ; 
Blanche  is  uniformly  detested.  Becky  is  frank  and  simple; 
Blanche  is  a  lump  of  affectation.  Becky’s  subjects  are  faithful 
to  her ;  Blanche’s  victims  take  the  first  opportunity  of  escaping 
from  her.  The  seminal  difference — the  seed  from  which  all  the 
minor  differences  spring — is  this:  Mr.  Thackeray  has  infused  a 
strong  dose  of  common  sense  into  Becky,  and  a  strong  dose  of 
folly  into  Blanche.  Each  is  fond  of  power.  Becky  obtains  her 
influence  by  the  slow,  sure  process  of  being  useful  and  agreeable. 
She  seduces  Miss  Crawley,  tlie  rich  woman  of  the  world,  by 
flattery  and  wit ;  old  Sir  Pitt  Crawley,  her  brother,  the  bearish, 
loutish,  country  squire,  by  entering  into  all  his  schemes,  correct¬ 
ing  his  blunders,  and  managing  his  whole  household.  When  she 
quits  him  for  a  short  visit  to  his  sister,  he  follows  to  implore  her 
immediate  return.  ‘I  want  you,’  he  says;  *I  can’t  git  on 

*  without  you.  I  didn’t  see  Avhat  it  was  till  you  went  away. 
‘  The  house  all  goes  wrong.  It’s  not  the  same  place.  All  my 

*  accounts  has  got  muddled  agin.  You  must  come  back.  Do 

*  come  back  1  dear  Becky,  do  come  !’  The  female  favourite  of 
the  father  is  seldom  that  of  the  sun  ;  but  she  subjugates  Sir  Pitt 
the  Second  as  effectually  as  Sir  Pitt  the  First.  She  reveals  to 
him  the  secret  of  his  own  talents  and  virtues ;  proves  to  him  that 
he  has  undervalued  himself,  and  is  still  more  undervalued  by  his 
wife ;  and  sends  him  home,  after  every  visit,  thinking  to  himself 
how  much  she  admires  him,  and  how  much  he  deserves  to  be 
admired. 

Such  are  the  tactics  of  Becky.  Blanche  obtains  her  power 
by  the  coarse  and  easy  instrument  of  fear.  She  domineers  by 
teasing  and  frightening.  Her  modus  operandi  is  well  explained 
in  an  early  dialogue  between  Sir  Francis  Clavering  (her  step¬ 
father)  and  Captain  Strong,  his  resident  companion  and  man  of 
business. 

*  “  I  say.  Strong,”  one  day  the  Baronet  said,  as  the  pair  were  con¬ 
versing  after  dinner  over  the  billiard  table,  and  that  great  unbosomer 
of  secrets,  a  segar ;  “  I  say.  Strong,  I  wish  your  wife  was  dead.” 

So  do  I. — That’s  a  cannon,  by  Jove. — But  she  won’t ;  she’ll  live 


218 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


•  Jan. 


for  ever  —  you  see  if  she  don’t.  Wliy  do  you  wish  her  off  the  hooks, 
Frank,  my  boy?”  asked  Captain  Strong. 

‘  “  Because  then  you  might  marry  Alissy.  She  ain’t  bad  looking. 
She’ll  have  ten  thousand,  and  that’s  a  good  bit  of  money  for  such  a 
poor  devil  as  you,”  drawled  out  the  other  gentleman.  “And  gad. 
Strong,  I  hate  her  worse  and  worse  every  day.  I  can’t  stand  her. 
Strong,  by  gad  I  can’t.” 

‘  “  I  wouldn’t  take  her  at  twice  the  figure,”  Captain  Strong  said, 
laughing.  “  I  never  saw  such  a  little  devil  in  my  life.” 

‘  “  I  should  like  to  poison  her,”  said  the  sententious  Baronet ;  “  by 
Jove  I  should.” 

*  “  Why,  what  has  she  been  at  now  ?”  asked  his  friend. 

‘  “  Nothing  particular,”  answered  Sir  Francis  ;  “  only  her  old  tricks. 
That  girl  has  such  a  knack  of  making  everybody  miserable,  that  hang 
me  it’s  quite  surprising.  Last  night  she  sent  the  governess  crying  away 
from  the  dinner  table.  Afterwards,  as  I  was  passing  Frank’s  room, 
I  heard  the  poor  little  beggar  howling  in  the  dark,  and  found  his 
sister  had  been  frightening  his  soul  out  of  his  body,  by  telling  him 
stories  about  the  ghost  that’s  in  the  house.  At  lunch  she  gave  my 
lady  a  turn  ;  and  though  my  wife’s  a  fool,  she’s  a  good  soul — I’m 
hanged  if  she  ain’t” 

< tt did  Missy  do  to  her?”  Strong  asked. 

‘  “  Why  hang  me,  if  she  didn’t  begin  talking  about  the  late  Amory, 
my  predecessor,”  the  Baronet  said  with  a  grin.  “  She  got  some 
picture  out  of  the  Keepsake,  and  said  she  was  sure  it  was  like  her 
dear  father.  She  wanted  to  know  where  her  father’s  grave  was. 
Hang  her  father !  Whenever  Miss  Amory  talks  about  him.  Lady 
Clavering  always  bursts  out  crying :  and  the  little  devil  will  talk 
about  him  in  order  to  spite  her  mother.  To*day  when  she  began,  I 
got  in  a  confounded  rage,  said  I  was  her  father,  and  —  and  that  sort 
of  thing  ;  and  then.  Sir,  she  took  a  shy  at  me.” 

‘“And  what  did  she  say  about  you,  Frank?”  Mr.  Strong,  still 
laughing,  inquired  of  his  friend  and  patron. 

‘  “  Gad,  she  said  I  wasn’t  her  father ;  that  I  wasn’t  fit  to  compre¬ 
hend  her ;  that  her  father  must  have  been  a  man  of  genius,  and  fine 
feelings,  and  that  sort  of  thing :  whereas  I  had  married  her  mother 
for  money.” 

'  ‘  “  Well,  didn’t  you  ?  ”  asked  Strong. 

‘  “  It  don’t  make  it  any  the  pleasanter  to  hear  because  it’s  true, 
don’t  you  know  ?”  Sir  Francis  Clavering  answered.  “  I  ain’t  a  lite¬ 
rary  man  and  that ;  but  I  ain’t  such  a  fool  as  she  makes  me  out.  I 
don’t  know  how  it  is,  but  she  always  manages  to  —  to  put  me  in  the 
hole,  don’t  you  understand  ?  She  turns  all  the  house  round  her  in 
her  quiet  way.  I  wish  she  was  dead,  Ned.”  ’  (YoL  L  pp.  225,  226.) 

Becky’s  weapon  is  as  sharp  as  Blanche’s,  perhaps  sharper,  and 
she  is  quite  ready  to  use  it  when  the  necessity  occurs  :  but  she 
keeps  it  in  reserve  for  that  necessity  ;  never  draws  it  except  in 
self-defence ;  and  takes  care  that  the  wound,  though  it  may 
smart,  shall  not  rankle.  She  despises  those  about  her  too  much 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works.  219^ 

to  feel  lasting  resentment ;  is  always  willing  to  shake  hands 
with  a  baffled  assailant ;  and  generally  manages  that  her  adver¬ 
sary  shall  be  as  placable  as  she  is  herself.  Neither  Blanche  nor 
Becky  cares  about  truth  ;  but  Becky  knows  the  value  of  false¬ 
hood,  and  that  its  power  is  easily  worn  out  by  promiscuous  use. 
She  reserves  it  therefore  for  great  occasions,  and  tells  the  truth, 
unless  something  considerable  is  to  be  got  by  lying.  Blanche 
lies  without  any  motive  except  the  exercise  of  her  ingenuity, 
and  thus  wastes  her  mendacity  to  no  purpose. 

Neither  Blanche  nor  Becky  cares  about  her  friends,  but 
Blanche  adopts  and  throws  them  away  from  mere  caprice.  She 
is  constantly  forming  useless  intimacies,  and  turning  them  into 
mischievous  enmities.  Becky  bestows  her  affection  only  on  those 
whom  she  thinks  worthy  of  it ;  that  is  to  say,  on  those  whom 
she  hopes  to  make  her  instruments.  If  she  finds  them  useful, 
and  while  she  finds  them  useful,  she  *  grapples  them  to  her  soul 
‘  with  hooks  of  steel.’  When  they  become  useless,  she  lets  them 
go,  but  quietly  and  silently,  without  any  breach,  so  that  if  at  a 
fflture  time  they  should  become  serviceable,  as  is  the  case  in  one 
or  two  memorable  instances,  she  may  be  able  at  once  to  resume 
them.  Blanche  and  Becky  are  both  fond  of  admiration,  but 
Becky  knows  that  it  is  not  to  be  obtained  by  asking  for  it. 
She  resolves  to  be  simple  and  unaffected  ;  and  .being  a  consum¬ 
mate  actress,  she  succeeds.  Blanche  is  always  imploring  atten¬ 
tion,  always  trying  on  a  new  manner  or  a  new  character.  ‘  She 

*  dr^s  her  shoulders,’  says  one  of  her  intended  victims,  ‘  out  of 
‘  her  dress ;  she  never  lets  her  eyes  alone ;  she  goes  about  sim- 

*  pering  and  ogling,  like  a  French  waiting-maid.’  The  inside  of 
Becky  is  diseased  enough,  but  the  outside  is  polished,  consistent, 
and  natural.  Blanche’s  exterior  is  in  as  bad  taste  as  her  interior 
is  corrupt.  It  is  all  fantastic,  gaudy,  glaring,  and  ill-assorted. 

Becky  is  a  simple  character ;  Blanche  is  an  inconsistent  one. 

As  we  use  these  words  in  a  technical  sense,  we  shall  cxplmn 
them  at  some  length ;  and  we  hope  that  our  explanation  may 
throw  light  on  that  portion  of  poetical  imitation  —  by  far  the 
most  important  portion  —  which  has  human  nature  for  its  subject. 

Fictitious  characters  may,  we  think,  be  conveniently  divided 
into  three  classes  —  the  Simple,  the  Mixed,  and  the  Inconsistent. 

By  simple  characters,  we  mean  the  persons  to  whom  no  qua¬ 
lities  are  attributed  by  the  jxiet,  except  those  which  are  sub¬ 
servient  to  one  another,  and  co-operate  in  the  main  work  which 
the  person  in  question  has  to  do.  By  mixed  characters,  we  mean 
the  persons  who  are  endowed  by  him  with  different  attributes, 
independent  of  one  another,  some  of  which  are  essential  to  the 
principal  parts  which  they  have  to  perform,  and  others  have  no 


220 


1 


Thackeray’s  Works,  Jan. 

connexion  with  them.  By  inconsistent  characters,  we  mean  those 
who  possess  discordant  qualities, — qualities  which  counteract  or 
modify,  or  even  neutralise,  one  another.  The  test  whether  a 
character  is  simple,  mixed,  or  inconsistent  is,  to  try  what  would  be 
the  effect  of  removing  any  one  of  its  attributes.  If  that  removal 
would  leave  it  incomplete,  unfit  to  execute  the  duties  assigned 
to  it  by  the  poet,  it  is  a  simple  character.  If  the  quality  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  removed  would  not  be  missed,  the  character  is 
mixed.  If  that  removal  would  render  the  rest  of  the  character 
more  harmonious,  more  efficient  for  the  performance  of  any  one 
or  more  of  its  parts,  it  is  not  only  mixed,  but  also  inconsistent. 

There,  are  no  simple  characters  in  real  life.  Nature  varies 
almost  infinitely  her  attributes,  and  gives  to  every  man  innu¬ 
merable  qualities,  some  of  which  are  independent  of  one  another, 
and  others  are  discordant.  All  her  characters  are  both  mixed 
and  inconsistent ;  and  it  is  this  mixture  and  inconsistency  that 
renders  them  distinct.  Every  human  being  belongs  to  so  many 
thousand  different  classes,  that  no  two  individuals,  possessing 
precisely  the  same  qualities,  in  precisely  the  same  proportions, 
have  ever  been  found.  But  the  poet  has  not  space  for  these 
details.  The  greater  part  of  his  characters  are  simple,  because 
they  are  wanted  only  for  some  particular  purpose :  they  are  the 
Fortis  Gyas,  fortisque  Cloanthus,  and  Fidus  Achates  of  his 
muster  roll.  All  that  we  wish  to  know  of  Banquo,  Shakspeare 
tells  us ;  namely,  that  he  is  brave.  All  that  we  hear  of  Duncan 
is  that  he  is  kind.  We  should  think  it  impertinent,  if  some 
scenes  were  added  to  Macbeth,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  what 
sort  of  a  husband  Banquo  was,  or  what  were  the  favourite 
amusements  of  Duncan.  Even  of  the  more  highly  finished 
characters,  the  greater  part  are  simple.  Ulysses  is  a  simple 
character.  The  elements  of  which  he  is  comijosed  are,  strong 
domestic  and  patriotic  affections,  patience,  dissimulation,  pru¬ 
dence,  sagacity,  presence  of  mind,  fertility  of  resource,  intre¬ 
pidity,  and  daring  amounting  almost  to  rashness.  Every  one 
of  these  qualities  was  necessary  to  bring  him  from  Ogygia  to 
Ithaca,  and  to  enable  him  to  plan  and  to  effect  the  destruction 
of  the  suitors.  They  form  the  whole  of  his  character,  so  far  as 
Homer  has  revealed  it  to  us.  Bichard  the  Third  is  a  simple 
character.  Even  his  gaiety  could  not  be  abstracted  from  him 
without  leaving  a  gap  in  the  general  outline.  His  wit  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  show  his  remorseless  unscrupulousness,  his  unflinching 
au^ity.  It  is  provoked  by  his  crimes.  It  is  most  brilliant 
when  he  is  planning  or  executing,  or  reflecting  on  some  atrocity. 
Hypocrisy,  treachery,  and  murder  are  his  sport.  He  prepares 
his  crimes  with  satisfaction, — he  looks  back  to  them  with  mer- 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


221 


riment.  It  is  not  that  he  has  any  pleasure  in  human  suffering, 
but  that  he  is  utterly  indifferent  to  it.  He  does  not  torture,  he 
only  kills,  and  kills  only  those  who  are  in  his  way.  But  as 
obstacle  after  obstacle,  that  is  to  say,  life  after  life,  that  rose 
between  him  and  the  crown,  is  removed,  his  delight  breaks  out 
in  the  bitter  yet  playful  humour  which  makes  him  at  once  the 
most  detestable  and  the  most  amusing  of  villains. 

Perhaps  the  finest  mixed  character  ever  drawn  is  Henry,  as 
Prince  Hal  and  as  Henry  the  Fifth.  His  levity  and  dissipation, 
pushed,  as  they  are,  almost  to  dissoluteness,  have  no  connexion 
with  his  wisdom  and  courage.  If  the  ludicrous  scenes  in  the 
two  parts  of  Henry  the  Fourth  had  never  been  written,  we 
should  not  have  felt  their  loss.  The  remainder  would  have 
formed  a  great  tragedy,  in  which  Prince  Henry  would  have 
been  a  well-drawn,  grand,  and  simple  character.  If  the  serious 
scenes  had  been  lost,  we  should  have  had  a  most  amusing 
comedy,  with  Falstaff  and  Hal  as  its  heroes.  And  yet  the  cha¬ 
racter  is  not  one  of  those  to  which  we  have  given  the  name  of 
inconsistent.  The  baser  and  the  higher  qualities  of  Henry  do 
not  interfere  with  one  another.  He  throws  off  at  once  the 
trifier  when  he  is  required  to  rise  into  the  hero,  and  the  hero 
when  he  is  at  leisure  to  subside  into  the  trifier.  The  reader 
perceives  no  incongruity.  He  feels  that  the  same  desire  for 
excitement,  indifference  to  consequences,  and  light-hearted  au¬ 
dacity,  seduce  Hal  to  indulge  his  taste  for  humour  at  Gadshill 
and  the  Boar’s  Head,  and  impel  Henry  to  seek  glory  by  encoun¬ 
tering  Percy  at  Shrewsbury  and  all  France  at  Agincourt. 

Hotspur,  like  Henry,  is  tragi-comic.  His  wit  and  his  humour 
almost  rival  those  of  Falstaff.  They  are  most  brilliant  on  the 
gravest  occasions.  He  jests  in  a  stormy  interview  with  the 
king, — he  jests  when  he  is  dividing  England  with  his  co-con¬ 
spirators, — he  is  never  more  amusing  than  when  he  takes  leave 
of  his  wife  before  his  last  fatal  battle.  And  yet  we  are  inclined 
to  class  him  among  simple  characters.  His  gaiety  is  the  mere 
ebullition  of  a  bold,  self-relying,  impetuous,  ambitious  temper, 
which  exults  in  contest  and  danger.  His  delight,  as  the  struggle 
approaches,  foams  out  in  taunt,  and  jest,  and  mockery,  but  his 
levity  does  not  influence  his  conduct.  Levity  is  an  element  in 
the  disposition  of  Prince  Hal,  but  only  in  the  manner  of 
Hotspur. 

We  now  come  to  inconsistent  characters.  It  may  be  as  well 
to  state  expressly,  what  perhaps  is  obvious,  that  by  an  incon¬ 
sistent  character  we  do  not  mean  what  is  generally  expressed 
by  those  words, —  a  character  to  which  incompatible  attributes  are 
assigned.  Such  characters  cannot  exist  in  nature,  and  of  course 


222  Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

ought  to  be  banished  from  fiction.  "We  repeat,  that  by  an 
inconsistent  character  we  mean  one  of  which  the  elements, 
though  compatible,  are  repugnant.  The  great  painter  of  incon¬ 
sistent  characters  is  Pope.  They  suit  his  delight  in  contrast  and 
antithesis.  One  of  the  most  finished  is  that  of  Wharton. 

*  Thus  with  each  gift  of  nature  and  of  art, 

And  wanting  nothing  but  an  honest  heart, 

Grown  all  to  all,  from  no  one  vice  exempt; 

And  most  contemptible,  to  shun  contempt ; 

Ilis  Passion  still,  to  covet  gen’ral  praise. 

His  Life,  to  forfeit  it  a  thousand  ways  ; 

A  constant  Bounty,  which  no  friend  has  made ; 

An  angel  Tongue,  which  no  man  can  persuade ; 

A  fool,  with  more  of  Wit  than  all  mankind. 

Too  rash  for  thought,  for  action  too  refin’d : 

A  Tyrant  to  the  wife  his  heart  approves ; 

A  Rebel  to  the  very  king  he  lores ; 

He  dies,  sad  outcast  of  each  church  and  state. 

And,  harder  still !  flagitious,  yet  not  great.* 

(Moral  Essays,  Ep.  i.  p.  193.) 

Don  Quixote  is  a  boldly-drawn  inconsistent  character.  He 
is  a  man  of  great  good  sense,  and  knowledge  of  books  and  of  the 
world.  If  romances  of  chivalry  had  never  been  written  he  would 
have  passed  the  whole  of  his  life  as  he  passed  the  greater  part  of 
it, — a  respected  country  gentleman,  dividing  his  time  between 
literature,  field  si)orts,  and  society.  But  his  head  is  turned  by 
stories  of  kuight-errantry.  He  devotes  himself  to  their  study, 
admits  implicitly  all  their  absurdities,  and,  while  he  remains 
sensible  and  sagacious  on  nil  other  subjects,  on  this  alone  he  is 
mad.  He  believes  himself  to  be  living  in  the  times  of  Amadis 
de  Gaul,  and  Florismarte  of  Hyrcania,  expects  adventures  like 
theirs,  and  makes  their  conduct  his  model  So  far  as  these 
delusions  extend,  his  bodily  and  his  mental  senses  are  perverted. 
He  takes  windmills  for  giants,  sheep  for  armies,  pothouses  for 
castles,  and  Maritornes  for  a  princess.  When  out  of  his  armour 
he  b  just  and  humane ;  but  when  occupied  as  a  knight-errant, 
he  thinks  it  his  duty  to  require  any  passenger  whom  he  meets  to 
admit  the  peerless  beauty  of  Dulcinea,  and  to  murder  those  who 
refuse.  As  a  philosopher,  he  reasons  wisely  on  the  theory  (rf 
government,  on  the  necessity  of  |)enal  laws,  and  the  duty  of  sub¬ 
mission  to  authority :  as  a  knight,  he  attacks  the  king’s  oflScers, 
breaks  the  chain  of  galley-slaves,  and  lets  loose  a  band  of 
wretches  who  have  just  confessed  to  him  the  justice  of  their 
sentences.  With  wonderful  skill  he  is  made  to  pass  and  repass 
from  sanity  to  madness.  He  sits  before  Master  Peter’s  puppet- 
show,  a  quiet,  intelligent  spectator,  criticises  the  management  of 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Work*. 


223 


the  story,  and  objects  to  the  introduction  of  bells  as  an  ana- 
chronism ;  but  no  sooner  is  he  interested  in  the  scene  than  he 
believes  in  its  reality,  rushes  at  the  little  theatre  to  the  rescue  of 
Mclisendra,  cuts  to  pieces  the  hostile  puppets,  would  have 
beheaded  the  showman  himself  if  he  had  not  ducked  under  his 
stage,  and  exchums  in  the  exultation  of  his  triumph,  ‘  AVould  to 

*  God  that  this  could  have  been  seen  by  all  the  despisers  of 

*  knight-errantry  1  Where  would  the  brave  Gayferos  and  the 

*  beautiful  Melisendra  now  have  been  if  I  had  not  been  present  ?’ 
The  showman  and  Sancho  convince  him  that  he  has  taken  puppets 
for  men ;  he  agrees  to  pay  for  the  damage,  and  sits  down  with 
Master  Peter  and  the  innkeeper  to  compute  it.  King  Marsilio, 
who  has  lost  a  head,  is  valued  at  four  reals ;  Charlemagne,  whose 
crown  is  split,  at  three ;  and  for  the  fair  Melisendra,  whose  nose 
is  gone.  Master  Peter  asks  five.  At  the  name  of  Melisendra^ 
Don  Quixote  relapses  into  his  delusion : — ‘Don’t  play  your  tricks 
‘  upon  me,’  he  cries ;  ‘  Melisendra  must  have  been  safe  in  Paris 
‘  an  hour  ago.  I  watched  her  horse  as  she  was  making  her  escape : 

‘  he  was  flying  rather  than  galloping !’ 

For  the  perfection  of  the  inconsistent  character  (as,  indeed,  for 
the  perfection  of  every  other)  we  must  go  to  Sha^speare.  One 
of  the  finest,  among  the  many  that  he  has  drawn, -is  Othello. 
He  is  a  union  not  merely  of  dissimilar  qualities,  but  of  dissimilar 
natures.  He  is  a  civilised  barbarian.  All  that  we  know  of  his 
birth  is,  that  it  is  ‘  fetched  from  men  of  royal  siege.’  How  or 
when  he  became  a  Christian  we  are  not  told ;  but  it  is  certmn 
that  he  must  have  passed  .his  childhood  in  a  harem,  acquiring 
with  his  earliest  impressions  the  jealousy  and  suspicion  respecting 
women,  and  the  domestic  despotism  of  a  Mahometan  court. 
His  youth  and  manhood  are  military :  and  we  find  him,  at  the 
opening  of  the  jday,  ‘  somewhat  declined  into  the  vale  of  years,’ 
a  grave  and  dignified  soldier.  He  is 

‘  The  noble  Moor,  whom  the  full  senate 
Call  all-in-all  sufficient  —  the  noble  nature 
Whom  passion  cannot  shake ;  whose  solid  virtue 
The  shot  of  accident  or  dart  of  chance 
Can  neither  graze  nor  pierce.’ 

All  the  barbarian  is  obliterated.  His  behaviour  during  the  two 
first  acts  justifies  Lodovico’s  praise.  Nothing  can  be  more  calm 
or  more  polished.  When,  within  one  hour  of  his  marriage,  he  is 
summoned  before  the  senate,  he  does  not  resent  the  contumely 
or  even  the  violence  of  Brabantio;  he  pleads  his  cause  with 
consummate  moderation  and  skill,  accepts  the  command  of 
Cyprus  with  modest  self-reliance,  obeys  cheerfully  the  order  of 


1 


224  Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan. 

instant  departure,  and,  without  a  shadow  of  suspicion,  places 
Desdemona  in  logo’s  hands  to  follow  him. 

The  very  morning  after  their  arrival  at  Cyprus,  lago  darkly 
hints  to  him  a  doubt  as  to  the  firmness  of  Desdemona’s  virtue. 
He  accuses  her  of  nothing  actually  wrong,  but  states  plausible 
grounds  why  she  should  be  watched.  The  suspicion  acts  on 
Othello  like  a  specific  poison.  It  sets  on  fire  all  the  old  Ma¬ 
hometan  tendency  to  jealousy,  which  a  European  life  seemed  to 
have  eradicated.-  His  barbarian  nature  reappears.  At  first  his 
habits  of  civilisation  combat  it. 

•  He  proposes  to  act  as  becomes  a  great  Venetian  noble ;  to 
inquire  into  his  wife’s  conduct ;  and,  if  lago’s  suspicions  prove 
imfounded,  to  foiget  them ;  if  they  are  confirmed,  to  separate 
himself  from  Desdemona,  — 

He  says, 

‘  ril  see,  before  I  doubt ;  when  I  doubt,  prove. 

If  I  do  prove  her  haggard, 

I’ll  whistle  her  off,  and  let  her  down  the  wind : 

Away  at  once  with  love  or  jealousy.’ 

Desdemona  enters,  and  he  exclaims,  — 

*  If  she  be  false,  O,  then  heaven  mocks  itself!  — 

.  m  not  believe  it.’ 

They  go  together  to  a  great  dinner,  at  the  end  of  which 
Othello  and  lago  meet  again. 

By  this  time  the  barbarian  has  got  the  upper  hand.  He  de¬ 
mands,  indeed,  from  lago  proof  of  Desdemona’s  guilt,  but  in  the 
meantime  assumes  it.  lago  tells  him,  by  way  of  proof,  that 
lately  he  lay  with  Cassio,  and  heard  him  exclaim  in  his  sleep,  — 

‘  Sweet  Desdemona, 

Let  us  hide  our  loves. 

Oh,  cursed  fate,  that  gave  thee  to  the  Moor !’ 

The  falsehood  of  this  story  was  obvious.  Cassio  and  lago 
had  ]»rted  the  very  evening  of  the  marriage ;  they  had  arrived 
at  Cyprus  in  separate  ships  the  day  before  this  conversation 
took  place,  and  the  intervening  night  had  been  the  busy  one 
which  was  filled  by  the  drunken  quarrel  and  Cassio’s  disgrace. 

Othello  swallows  it  with  savage  credulity.  He  no  longer 
thinks  of  inquiry,  or  of  separation.  He  is  {^ain  the  Arab  or  the 
Bedouin  of  his  youth,  and  no  conduct,  except  such  as  might  fit 
a  Bedouin  or  an  Arab,  occurs  to  him. 

He  cries, 

‘  Oh  blood,  lago,  blood ! 

Within  these  three  days  let  me  hear  thee  say. 


1854. 


225 


Thackeray’s  Works. 

That  Cassio’s  not  alive.  —  I  will  withdraw, 

To  furnish  me  with  some  swift  means  of  death 
For  the  fair  devil  Now  art  thou  my  lieutenant.’ 

The  last  words  are  remarkable.  Othello  has  so  thoroughly 
forgotten  the  habits  of  civilised  life,  that  he  does  not  see  that, 
after  having  murdered  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  a  Venetian 
senator,  and  assassinat^  Cassio,  a  man  of  high  rank  in  the 
republic,  he  cannot  remain  governor  of  Cyprus.  Well  may 
Desdemona  exclaim,  — 

‘  My  lord  is  not  my  lord  ;  nor  should  I  know  him. 

Were  he  in  favour,  as  in  humour,  altered.’ 

From  thence  until  the  very  last  scene  the  savage  in  him 
reigns  triumphant  He  does  not  preserve  even  the  outward 
proprieties  of  his  station,  but  insults  and  strikes  his  wife  in  the 
presence  of  the  envoy  from  the  senate. 

But  the  instant  that  he  has  satiated  his  revenge,  the  spirit 
from  the  desert  seems  to  be  appeased  by  the  sacrifice,  and 
quits  him.  He  now  ‘knows  that  his  act  shows  horrible  and 
‘  grim.’  He  listens  to  the  proofs  of  Desdemona’s  innocence, 
apologises  frankly  to  Cassio,  and  sits  in  judgment  on  his  own 
folly  and  crime.  The  horror  of  his  situation,  instead  of  dis¬ 
turbing,  quiets  him.  He  resumes  the  calm  dignity  of  a  great 
Venetian  leader.  Lodovico  proposes  to  carry  him  away  a  close 
prisoner  for  trial.  Othello  makes  no  direct  answer  to  the  threat, 
but  draws  in  a  few  clear  and  singularly  unimpassioned  lines,  a 
short  outline  ‘  of  these  unlucky  deeds,’  and  then  retires  from  the 
‘  extreme  perplexity  ’  in  which  he  is  involved  by  the  only  exit 
that  is  left  to  him,  a  resolute  and  not  undignified  suicide. 

Mr.  Thackeray’s  Blanche  is,  as  we  said  before,  an  incon¬ 
sistent  character.  Her  desire  of  power  is  constantly  interfering 
with  her  desire  of  sympathy.  She  cannot  help  teasing  those 
whom  she  wishes  to  please.  In  her  pursuit  of  immediate  admi¬ 
ration  she  loses  permanent  esteem,  and  becomes  a  plaything 
when  she  aims  at  being  an  idol.  When  she  sits  between  two 
admirers,  she  flirts  alternately  with  each,  and  thus  betrays  to 
them  both  the  emptiness  of  her  kindness.  Becky,  we  repeat,  is 
a  simple  character.  Numerous  as  her  qualities  are,  they  are  not 
discordant.  Not  one  of  them  could  be  taken  from  her  without 
damaging  her  powers  of  worldly  advancement. 

Rawdon  Crawley  is  one  of  Mr.  Thackeray’s  best  inconsistent 
characters.  He  is  a  gambler,  indeed  a  blackleg,  and  would  be 
an  actual  swindler  if  a  swindler  could  be  tolerated  in  society. 
He  approaches  as  near  to  swindling  as  the  law  will  allow.  He 
preys  on  the  young  and  the  inexperienced,  contracts  debts 
VOL.  XCIX.  NO.  CCI.  Q 


226 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


which  he  knows  never  can  be  paid,  and  lies  whenever  it  suits 
his  convenience.  Yet  this  degi^ed  nature  has  its  amiable  and 
its  respectable  side.  He  is  fond  of  his  wife  and  of  his  child. 
He  is  brave,  and  he  is  grateful.  He  has  an  honour  of  his  own, 
which,  though  its  province  is  narrow,  reigns  there  supreme.  He 
knows  that  his  only  chance  of  escaping  ruin  is  through  the 
friendship  of  Lord  Steyne.  But  the  instant  that  he  suspects 
how  that  friendship  has  been  purchase,  he  breaks  with  his 
patron,  sends  back,  poor  as  he  is,  the  thousand  pounds  which  he 
believes  to  have  been  Steyne’s  present  to  Becky,  and  is  with 
difficulty  restnuned  from  shooting  him. 

Arthur  Pendennis  is  a  mixed  character.  He  is  a  poet 
grafted  on  a  dandy.  So  far  as  he  is  a  dandy,  he  is  vain,  con¬ 
ceited,  and  extravagant.  So  far  as  he  is  a  poet,  he  is  inflam> 
mable  and  inconstant,  easily  attracted  and  easily  repelled. 
Having  scarcely  any  seriously  adopted  opinions,  or  principles,  or 
plans,  he  is  at  the  mercy  of  those  around  him.  It  is  a  defect 
in  the  story  that  his  conduct  recurs  in  a  sort  of  circle.  He  falls 
in  love  with  an  actress,  and  is  jilted ;  makes  love  to  Blanche,  is 
well  received  by  her,  and  then  cast  off,  and  to  please  his  mother 
offers  himself  to  Laura ;  she  refuses  him,  and  so  ends  the  first 
volume. 

In  the  second  volume  he  falls  in  love  with  a  porter’s 
daughter,  and  is  cured  by  a  fever ;  to  please  his  uncle  he  pro¬ 
poses  himself  again  to  Blanche,  and  is  engaged  to  her.  She 
jilts  him  :^in,  and  again  he  offers  himself  to  Laura ;  and,  as 
it  was  necessary  to  end  the  novel,  this  time  she  accepts  him. 

There  is  nothing  very  attractive  in  such  an  outline,  but  many 
of  the  details  are  full  of  beauty.  The  wonder  with  which, 
after  he  is  cured  of  an  attachment,  he  revisits  its  former  object, 
is  admirably  described.  So  is  his  last  courtship  of  Blanche  at 
Tunbridge  Wells,  where  the  blas4  dandy  and  blasee  flirt,  after 
mutual  attempts,  all  ineffectual,  to  be  fond  and  sentimental, 
confess  to  one  another  that  the  marriage  is ‘not  of  their  own 
seeking,  but  has  been  arranged  for  them  by  their  mammas  and 
uncles,  and  that  they  must  submit  to  it  like  a  good  little  boy 
and  girl. 

We  have  said  nothing  about  the  tragical  parts  of  the  story — 
about  Colonel  Altamont  and  his  frightful  secret  and  mysterious 
threats ;  or  Warrington’s  discarded  wife.  They  are  tacked  so 
slightly  to  the  comic  i)ortiotls,  that  they  might  easily  be  de¬ 
tached  altogether.  And  if  Mr.  Thackeray  should  think  fit 
hereafter  to  lighten  Pendennis,  and  so  improve  its  chances  of 
floating  down  to  posterity,  we  recommend  that  these  be  the 
portions  of  its  rigging  that  are  first  cut  away. 


1854. 


Thackeray’a  Works. 


227 


Esmond  is  a  reproduction  of  the  manners,  feelings,  thoughts, 
and  even  style  which  prevailetl  from  180  to  140  years  ago. 
It  is  a  wonderful  tour  de  force.  Without  doubt,  one  of  the 
charms  of  art  is  the  triumph  over  difficulty.  But  the  triumph 
must  not  be  a  barren  one.  The  value  of  what  is  gained  must 
bear  a  considerable  proportion  to  the  labour  that  has  been  ex¬ 
pended.  The  epic  in  twenty-four  books,  from  each  of  which  a 
letter  was  eliminated,  was  not  more  but  less  pleasing  than  if 
the  author  had  allowed  himself  free  use  of  the  alphabet.  Taken 
at  the  best,  the  task  of  a  novelist  is  difficult.  It  is  no  easy 
thing  to  invent  a  plausible  story,  a  story  which  shall  have  a 
beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end,  —  a  beginning  which  shall 
raise  expectation,  a  middle  which  shall  continue  it,  and  an  end 
which  shall  satisfy  it.  Neither  Richardson  nor  Fielding  has 
succeeded  in  doing  so  more  than  once.  It  is  less  difficult,  but 
still  far  from  easy,  to  people  that  story  with  characters,  distinct, 
natural,  and  amusing ;  and  to  make  them  talk  and  act  like  the 
living  models  supplied  by  the  author’s  experience.  If  to  the 
obstacles  which  nature  has  thrown  across  his  path,  the  poet 
thinks  fit  to  add  fresh  ones  of  his  own ;  if  he  builds  up  walls 
in  order  to  jump  over  them,  the  reader  always  suspects 
that  what  is  supplied  to  him  is  not  the  author’s  best ;  that  some 
real  merit  which  he  would  have  enjoyed  is  sacrificed  to  an 
imaginary  one  which  he  does  not  care  about. 

Now  the  amount  of  the  self-imposed  budren  which  Mr. 
Thackeray  has  undertaken  to  bear  may  be  estimated,  when  we 
consider  how  few  have  been  the  writers  who  have  ventured  to 
submit  to  it.  For  at  least  3000  years  poets  have  taken  their 
principal  characters  from  history  or  mythology.  But  they  have 
seldom  borrowed  more  than  the  names,  and  perhaps  one  or  two 
of  the  most  notorious  qualities,  and  one  or  two  of  the  most 
notorious  adventures,  of  their  heroes.  Everything  else  they  have 
generally  copied  from  what  they  saw  around  them.  All 
Homer’s  men  and  women,  whether  they  be  Euro[)eans  or 
Asiatics,  Greeks  or  Fhseacians,  Trojans  or  allies,  speak  the 
same  language,  use  the  same  weapons,  amuse  themselves  with 
the  same  games,  worship  the  same  gods,  believe  in  the  same 
legends,  are  in  fact  identical  in  habits  and  manners.  All  those 
of  Virgil,  whether  natives  of  Ilium,  or  Carthage,  or  Sicily,  or 
Latium,  are  Romans  of  the  Augustan  age.  Four  great  tragic 
poets,  perhaps  the  four  greatest  that  ever  wrote,  have  brought 
on  the  stage  Theseus.  In  the  Gldipus  Coloneus,  he  is  an  Athe¬ 
nian  statesman ;  in  the  Supplices,  an  Athenian  rhetoincian ;  in 
Phedre,  a  courtier  of  Louis  Quatorze ;  and  in  the  Midsummer 


L 


228 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


Night’s  Dream,  a  highly  educated  English  gentleman.  Not 
one  of  these  great  writers  thought  himself  bound  to  reproduce 
the  Theseus  of  tradition,  half-savage,  half-divine,  the  first 
cousin  and  imitator  of  Hercules,  who  roamed  over  Greece 
destroying  robbers,  killing  wild  beasts,  and  carrying  off  women ; 
a  mixture  of  giant  and  knight-errant ;  raised,  according  to  one 
legend,  for  his  virtues,  to  be  a  god ;  according  to  another,  for  his 
Climes  seated  for  ever  in  hell.  Even  Walter  Scott,  though,  in 
order  to  please  critics  who  are  intolerant  of  anachronisms,  he 
endeavours  to  copy  the  manners  and  feelings  of  a  past  age,  does 
not  try  to  speak  in  its  language  or  in  its  style.  His  events 
may  be  mediaeval,  but  he  relates  them  like  any  other  novelist  of 
the  nineteenth  century.  Though  the  scene  of  Rob  Roy  is  laid 
140  years  ago,  and  though  Osbaldiston  is  his  own  biographer, 
he  tells  his  story  as  if  he  had  just  finished  his  education  in  the 
new  town  of  Edinburgh.  The  courage,  the  diligence,  and  the 
skill  of  Mr.  Thackeray  have  enabled  him  to  avoid  this  incon¬ 
sistency.  Colonel  Esmond  writes  as  one  of  the  best  of  her  wits 
might  have  written  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne. 

We  cannot,  however,  avoid  thinking  that  this  merit  has  been 
purchased  too  dearly.  The  reader  feels  always  that  he  is 
listening  to  falsetto  tones ;  that  he  is  looking  at  the  imitation  of 
an  imitation.  If  Esmond  had  been  confined  within  ns  short 
limits,  it  might  have  taken  rank  with  the  *  Defence  of  Natural 
*  Society.’  But  a  parody  three  volumes  long  becomes  tiresome. 
We  want  the  author  to  throw  aside  the  fetters  which  impede  his 
movements,  though  we  require  him  to  keep  the  costume  which  dis¬ 
guises  his  person.  We  wish  to  hear  Jacob’s  own  voice,  though 
the  hands  be  the  hands  of  Esau. 

The  period  at  which  !Mr.  Thackeray  has  laid  his  scene  was 
scarcely  a  matter  of  choice,  when  once  he  had  determined  to^ 
imitate  antiquated  forms  of  thought  and  expression.  Those 
who  succeeded  the  wits  of  Queen  Anne’s  days  were  moderns. 
Thomson,  Goldsmith,  Adam  Smith,  and  Hume,  all  remem¬ 
bered  Pope  and  Swift ;  but  they  wrote  as  we  do ;  —  better,  per¬ 
haps,  so  far  as  they  took  more  pains,  but  with  no  other 
perceptible  difference.  The  giants,  indeed,  who  ruled  the  lite¬ 
rary  world  between  the  Reformation  and  the  Restoration  used 
a  style  and  a  language  sufficiently  different  from  our  own ;  but 
they  were  unfit  for  domestic  narrative.  No  one  could  have 
tolerated  the  loves  of  Beatrix  and  Esmond  enveloped  in  the 
grand  periods  of  Bacon  or  Milton,  or  even  in  the  quaint,  loose 
verbiage  of  the  Arcadia.  The  school  which  Mr.  Thackeray  has 
imitated  was  remote  enough  to  be  peculiar,  and  near  enough  for 
its  peculiarities  not  to  offend. 


1S54. 


229 


Thackeray’s  Works. 

But  that  period  had  little  else  to  recommend  it.  It  was  one 
to  which  every  Englishman  must  look  back  with  disgust.  Up 
to  the  Bestoration  the  English,  at  least  in  the  higher  classes, 
had  been  a  serious  people.  Primogeniture  as  respects  land,  and 
the  exclusion  of  the  younger  branches  of  even  the  greatest  houses 
from  nobility,  —  the  happy  accident  from  which  so  many  of  our 
peculiarities  flow,  —  had  prevented  the  existence  among  us  of  the 
idle,  frivolous  caste  which,  during  the  16  th,  17  th,  and  18th  cen¬ 
turies,  formed  the  aristocracy  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Continent; 
a  caste  excluded  by  its  prejudices  from  commerce,  from  the  bar, 
from  medicine,  and,  except  in  its  high  dignities,  from  the  church, 
and  naturally  led,  with  the  exception  of  the  small  portion  of  it 
that  could  find  employment  in  arms,  to  dedicate  its  ample  leisure 
to  place-hunting  and  amusement.  From  the  Conquest  until  the 
Bestoration  the  rich  and  the  noble  of  England  had  had  duties 
to  perform.  The  rich  were  great  merchants  or  feudal  pro¬ 
prietors  ;  the  noble  were  statesmen  or  soldiers ;  all  the  members 
of  the  younger  branches,  and  the  younger  members  of  the  eldest 
branch,  who  in  I'rance  would  have  thronged  the  court  of  the 
sovereign,  or  lived  in  the  ruelles  of  the  capital,  were  actively 
engaged  in  business  or  in  professions. 

But  during  the  sixty  or  seventy  years  which  immediately 
followed  the  Bestoration,  London  seems  to  have  been  the  head¬ 
quarters  of  a  fashionable  crowd  which,  in  numbers,  in  wealth, 
in  idleness,  in  dissoluteness,  in  every  thing,  in  short,  except 
education  and  refinement,  rivalled  the  grand  monde  of  Paris. 
Of  course  we  cannot  now  dwell  on  the  causes  of  this  phe¬ 
nomenon.  The  increased  wealtli  of  the  unemployed  class  was 
probably  connected  with  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  tenures, 
and  the  facilities  thereby  given  to  mortgages  and  sales,  the 
increased  occupation  of  land  by  tenants  instead  of  by  proprie¬ 
tors,  the  enormous  augmentation  of  trade,  and  the  large  incomes, 
indeed,  the  large  fortunes,  that  could  be  made  in  the  public 
service,  or  squeezed  from  the  royal  bounty.  Its  dissoluteness 
was  partly  a  reaction  against  the  austerities  of  Puritanism,  and 
partly  a  coarse  imitation  of  the  polished  dissipation  of  France; 
but  it  would  probably  have  shown  itself,  even  if  there  had 
been  no  Puritans,  and  no  French :  in  fact,  it  was  the  necessary 
result  of  wealth  wanting  occupation  and  literature.  There 
were,  of  course,  literary  circles  as  brilliant  as  those  of  any  other 
period,  the  circles  in  which  the  great  writers  of  that  age  were 
formed ;  but  every  thing  shows  that  the  mass  of  the  fashionable 
world  was  then  deplorably  ignorant.  The  women  knew  nothing, 
and  professed  to  know  nothing.  The  men  passed  many  of  their 
mornings,  and  almost  all  their  evenings,  in  clubs,  and  at  the 


230 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


theatres ;  smoking,  drinking,  and  playing  at  cards,  or  listening 
to  stilted  tragedies  or  indecent  comedies. 

This  levity  was  made  hideous  by  the  intermixture  of  ferocity 
not  more  savage,  indeed,  perhaps  less  so,  than  that  of  the 
previous  century,  but  horrible  in  itself,  and  still  more  hoirible 
as  the  cruelty  of  careless  voluptuaries.  A  sanguinary  penal 
code  was  enforced  with  unrelenting  severity.  Temple  Bar  and 
London  Bridge  were  fringed  with  human  heads.  With  not 
one-fourth  of  the  present  population,  there  were  probably  fifty 
times  as  many  executions  every  year  as  there  are  now.  The 
whippings  of  females,  as  well  as  of  males,  were  peq)etual,  and 
were  paraded  up  and  down  the  most  public  thoroughfares ;  and 
yet  these  punishments  were  as  inefficacious  as  they  were  cruel. 
The  roads  around  London  were  beset  by  highwaymen;  the 
streets  were  infested  by  footpads ;  amateurs  in  crime,  who  have 
been  immortalised  in  ‘The  Spectator’  under  the  name  of  Mohocks, 
insulted  and  injured  passengers  by  way  of  amusement.  No  one 
seems  to  have  engaged  in  politics  who  was  not  sooner  or  later, 
and  generally  more  than  once,  guilty  of  treason  ;  the  basest  and 
the  most  unscrupulous  traitors  being  those  whom  their  crowns 
placed  above  the  law.  Duels  were  frequent  and  ferocious; 
the  seconds  fought  as  well  as  the  principals,  and  victory  was 
often  obtained  by  treachery.  Other  aristocracies  may  have 
been  more  contemptible,  but  none  can  have  been  less  attractive 
or  amiable,  than  that  of  the  English  court  from  the  return^of 
Charles  the  Second  down  to  the  death  of  Queen  Anne. 

Over-indulgence,  except  indeed  to  the  whimpering  little 
goddess  whom  he  deifies  in  every  novel,  is  not  Mr.  Thackeray’s 
weakness.  His  dramatis  personcs  arc  as  black  as  their  originals 
could  have  been.  The  only  prominent  male  character  who  is 
not  an  habitual  drunkard  is  the  hero.  Three  Lord  Castlewoods 
are  introduced.  The  first  is  described  as  passing  his  early  life 
abroad,  where  he  was  remarkable  only  for  duelling,  vice,  and 
play, — and  where  he  marries  and  then  deserts  the  mother  of 
the  hero.  He  passes  his  middle  age  in  London,  a  hanger-on  of 
ordinaries,  and  a  brawler  about  Alsatia  and  Whltefriars;  marries 
during  his  first  wife’s  life  an  old  maid  with  money;  and  is  killed 
at  the  battle  of  the  Boyne.  The  second  is  a  drunken  sensualist, 
who  ill-treats  and  insults  his  wife,  spoils  his  children,  gambles 
away  his  property,  and  is  killed  in  a  duel  The  thi^  turns 
Koman  Catholic,  marries  ill,  quarrels  with  his  own  relations, 
and  is  left,  at  the  end  of  the  story,  the  slave  of  his  wife’s  family 
of  Gennan  adventurers. 

The  hero,  of  course,  possesses  the  ordinary  heroic  qualities  of 
courage,  generosity,  and  affectionateness.  But  even  he  con- 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


231 


^  1854. 


Bpires  for  the  purpose  of  occasioning  a  new  revolution,  though 
he  strongly  suspects  that  his  success  will  be  mischievous  to  his 
country.  He  is  not  seduced  by  the  entreaties  of  any  friend ; 
he  is  not  driven  on  by  the  blind,  instinctive,  spaniel-like  loyalty, 
which  leads  a  legitimist  to  throw  his  fortunes,  his  life,  his 
family,  and  even  his  patriotism  at  the  feet  of  him  whom  he 
sWores  as  his  sovereign.  He  is  himself  the  originator  of  the 
scheme ;  he  estimates  calmly  the  results ;  ‘  has  his  own  fore- 
‘  bodings  as  to  what  they  may  be,  his  usual  sceptic  doubts  as  to 
‘the  benefit  which  may  accrue  to  the  country  by  bringing  a 

*  tipsy  young  monarch  back  to  it.’  The  motive  which,  in  spite 
of  all  these  doubts  and  forebodings,  impels  him  to  endeavour  to 
infiict,  at  the  hazard  of  a  civil  war,  such  a  master  on  his  country, 
is  merely  the  hope  that  by  doing  so  he  may  please  his  cousin 
Beatrix  Esmond,  one  of  the  heroines  of  the  novel,  a  violent 
Tory,  who  for  ten  long  years  has  been  the  object  of  Esmond’s 
unsuccessful  adoration.  With  no  other  object,  he  brings  the 
Pretender  in  disguise  to  England,  and  conceals  him  in  the  house 
of  his  relation  Lady  Castlewood,  the  mother  of  Beatrix.  His 
suspicions  as  to  the  worthlessness  of  his  intended  master  increase 
during  the  journey,  and  are  turned  into  convictions  by  the 
Prince’s  behaviour  as  a  guest.  Still  he  perseveres,  until  the 
Prince’s  attentions  to  Beatrix  become  marked.  Then, 

‘  Horrible  doubts  and  torments  racked  Esmond’s  soul.  ’Twas  a 
scheme  of  personal  ambition,  a  daring  stroke  for  a  selfish  end  —  he 
knew  it.  What  cared  he  in  his  heart  who  was  king  ?  Were  not  his 
very  sympathies  and  secret  convictions  on  the  other  side  —  on  the 
side  of  People,  Parliament,  Freedom  ?  —  And  here  was  he  engaged 
for  a  prince  that  had  scarce  heard  the  word  liberty ;  that  priests  and 
women,  tyrants  by  nature  both,  made  a  tool  of.’  (VoL  iii.  p.  234.) 

Beatrix  is  sent  into  the  country ;  and  Esmond,  having  pro¬ 
vided  against  this  danger,  resumes  the  conspirator,  and  passes 
a  long  day  with  the  Prince,  ‘  writing  proclamations  and  ad- 
‘  dresses  to  the  country,  to  the  Scots,  to  the  clergy,  to  the 

*  people  of  London  and  England,  announcing  the  arrival  of  the 
‘  exiled  descendant  of  three  sovereigns,  and  his  acknowledgment 
‘  by  his  sister  as  heir  to  the  throne.’  The  Prince  discovers  the 
banishment  of  Beatrix,  and  resents  it.  ‘  If  I  have  garters  to 

*  give  away,’  he  cries,  ‘  ’tis  to  noblemen  who  are  not  so  ready 
‘  to  think  evil.  Bring  me  a  coach,  and  let  me  quit  this  place, 

*  or  let  the  fair  Beatrix  return  to  it.’ 

Esmond’s  loyalty  is  instantly  suspended.  He  takes  the 
Prince  to  a  window  looking  into  Kensington  Square,  where  the 
watchman  is  crying  the  hour ;  reminds  his  guest,  the  man 
whom  he  is  endeavouring  to  make  hb  sovereign,  that  5000/. 


232 


Thackeray’s  Works.  Jan; 

is  offered  by  Parliament  for  his  capture,  points  out  to  him 
how  easily  he  could  betray  him ;  and  adds,  *  By  the  Heaven 

*  that  made  me  I  would  do  so,  if  I  thought  the  Prince,  for  his 

*  honour’s  sake,  would  not  desist  from  insulting  ours.' 

The  Prince  promises  amendment,  and  Esmond  continues  as 
zealously  as  before  to  ui^e  on  the  revolution.  The  Prince 
renews  his  attempts  on  Beatrix.  Esmond  breaks  his  swonf, 
and  renounces  him.  Detestable  as  n>ost  of  the  characters  in 
the  novel  are,  we  do  not  recollect  one  to  whom  equal  selfishness 
and  wickedness  are  attributed.  Even  in  F ranee,  demoralised  as 
it  has  been  by  sixty  years  of  revolutions,  the  most  unprincipled 
emeutier  w'ould  not  make  one  merely  to  gratify  his  mistress. 

AVe  have  already  mentioned  Mr.  Thackeray’s  practice  of 
having  a  good  and  a  bad  heroine ;  the  one  to  refuse  the  hero, 
the  other  to  marry  him.  In  Esmond  they  are  mother  and 
daughter,  the  daughter  being  the  bad  heroine  who  rejects,  the 
mother  the  good  heroine  who  accepts.  We  do  not  object  to 
the  mere  disparity  of  age.  Many  a  boy  of  eighteen  has  fallen  in 
love  with  a  woman  of  twenty-eight.  But  in  this  ease  a  man  of 
forty  falls  in  love  wdth  a  woman  of  about  fifty, — a  woman  with 
whom  he  has  lived  in  intimacy  ever  since  he  was  a  ehild,  who 
was  the  confidant  and  approver  for  many  years  of  his  love  for 
her  own  daughter,  whom  he  has  always  considered,  and  wished 
to  eonsidcr,  as  his  mother.  Such  a  plot  is  neither  natural 
nor  pleasing. 

Both  the  heroines  are  well  drawm.  The  whole  work  is  full 
of  praises  of  the  mother.  Lady  Castlewood.  Perhaps  these  are 
meant  only  to  show  the  uxoriousness  of  Esmond ;  but  if  they 
express  Mr.  Thackeray’s  opinion  as  to  the  beauty  of  the  portrait 
which  he  has  painted,  we  feel  bound  to  record  our  dissent. 
Lady  Castlewood  appears  to  us  to  be  a  w'oman  with  a  strong 
sense  of  duty  and  religion,  and  a  heart  always  overflowing  with 
affection,  and  eager  to  receive  it.  But  all  is  spoilt  by  violence 
of  temper,  and  by  a  jealousy  so  irritable  and  so  exclusive,  that 
even  Esmond,  after  their  marriage,  cannot  venture  in  her 
presence  to  show  his  love  for  their  daughter.  ‘  Her  husband’s 
‘love,’  says  the  daughter,  Mrs.  Warrington,  ‘was  a  gift  so 
‘  precious,  that  she  was  for  keeping  it  all,  and  could  part  with 
‘  none  of  it,  even  to  her  daughter.’  Mr.  Warrington  affirms 
that  their  happiness  in  marriage  was  perfect.  If  that  was  true. 
Colonel  Esmond’s  standard  of  happiness  must  have  been  low,  since 
it  was  conferred  on  him  by  a  wife  of  strong  feelings,  irritable, 
suspicious  temper,  quick  sensibility,  and  undiscriminating,  unre¬ 
lenting  jealousy. 

One  or  two  scenes  from  the  first  volume  .will  illustrate  her 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


233 


character.  Her  beauty  has  been  somewhat  impaired  by  small¬ 
pox,  and  her  husband  has  neglected  her  for  a  Mrs.  Harwood. 

‘“’Twas  after  Jason  left  her,  no  doubt,”  Lady  Castle  wood  said, 
with  one  of  her  smiles  to  young  Esmond  (who  was  reading  to  her  a 
version  of  certain  lines  out  of  Euripides),  “  that  Medea  became  a 
learned  woman,  and  a  great  enchantress.” 

‘  “  And  she  could  conjure  the  stars  out  of  heaven,”  the  young 
tutor  added,  “  but  she  could  not  bring  Jason  back  again.” 

‘  “  What  do  you  mean  ?”  asked  my  lady,  very  angry. 

*  “  Indeed  I  mean  nothing,”  said  the  other,  “  save  what  I  have  read 
in  books.  What  should  1  know  about  such  matters?  1  have  seen  no 
woman  save  you  and  little  Beatrix,  and  the  parson’s  wife,  and  my  late 
mistress,  and  your  ladyship’s  w'oraan  here.” 

‘  “  The  men  who  wrote  your  books,”  says  my  lady,  “  your  Horaces, 
and  Ovids,  and  Virgils,  as  far  as  1  know  of  them,  all  thought  ill  of 
us,  as  all  the  heroes  they  wrote  about  used  us  basely.  We  were  bred 
to  be  slaves  always  ;  and  even  of  our  own  times,  as  you  are  still  the 
only  lawgivers,  I  think  our  sermons  seem  to  say  that  the  best  woman 
is  she  who  bears  her  master’s  chains  most  gracefully.  ’Tis  a  pity 
there  are  no  nunneries  permitted  by  our  church.  Beatrix  and  1 
would  fly  to  one,  and  end  our  days  in  peace  there  away  from  you.” 

‘  “  And  is  there  no  slavery  in  a  convent  ?”  says  Esmond. 

‘  “  At  least  if  women  are  slaves  there  no  one  sees  them,”  answered 
the  lady.  “  They  don’t  work  in  street  gangs  with  the  public  to  jeer 
at  them  ;  and  if  they  suffer,  they  suffer  in  private.  Here  comes  my 
lord  home  from  hunting.  Take  away  the  books,  my  lord  does  not 
love  to  see  them.  Lessons  are  over  for  to-day,  Mr.  Tutor.”  And 
with  a  curtsey  and  a  smile  she  would  end  this  sort  of  colloquy.’  (Yol.  i. 
pp.  204,  205,  206.) 

Lord  Custlewood  next  confides  to  Esmond  his  annoyances. 

*  “  Is  a  woman,”  he  says,  “  never  to  forgive  a  husband  who  goes  a 
tripping  ?  Do  you  take  me  for  a  saint  ?  ” 

‘  “  Indeed,  Sir,  I  do  not,”  says  Harry,  with  a  smile. 

‘  “  Since  that  time  my  wife  is  as  cold  as  the  statue  at  Charing 
Cross.  I  tell  thee  she  has  no  forgiveness  in  her,  Henry.  Her  cold¬ 
ness  blights  my  whole  life,  and  sends  me  to  the  punch-bowl  or 
driving  about  the  country.  My  children  are  not  mine,  but  hers, 
when  we  are  together.  ’Tis  only  when  she  is  out  of  sight  with  her 
abominable  cold  glances,  that  they’ll  come  to  me,  and  that  I  dare  to 
give  them  as  much  as  a  kiss ;  and  that’s  why  I  take  ’em  and  love  ’em 
in  other  people’s  houses,  Harry.  I’m  killed  by  the  very  virtue  of 
that  proud  woman.  Virtue !  Give  me  the  virtue  that  can'forgive ; 
give  me  the  virtue  that  thinks  not  of  preserving  itself,  but  of  making 
other  folks  happy.”*  (Vol.  i.  pp.  270,  271.) 

Esmond  fancies  that  this  is  a  case  for  mediation,  and  ven¬ 
tured  most  gently  to  hint  to  his  adored  mistress,  that  she  was 
doing  her  husband  barm  by  her  ill  opinion  of  him ;  and  that  the 
happiness  of  all  the  family  depended  upon  setting  her  right. 


L 


234 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


‘  “  Have  you  ever  heard  me  utter  a  word  in  my  lord’s  disparage¬ 
ment  ?  ”  she  asked  hastily,  hissing  out  her  words,  and  stamping  her 
foot. 

‘  “  Indeed,  no,”  Esmond  said,  looking  down. 

‘  “  Are  you  come  to  me  as  his  ambassador —  You  f  ”  she  continued. 

‘  “  I  would  sooner  see  peace  between  you  than  anything  else  in  the 
world,”  Harry  answered ;  “  and  would  go  on  any  embassy  that  had 
that  end.” 

‘  “  So  you  are  my  lord’s  go-between  ?”  she  went  on,  not  regarding 
this  speech.  “  You  are  sent  to  bid  me  back  into  slavery  again,  and 
inform  me  that  my  lord’s  favour  is  graciously  restored  to  his  hand¬ 
maid  ?  He  is  weary  of  Covent  Garden,  is  he,  that  he  comes  home 
and  would  have  the  fatted  calf  killed  ?  ” 

‘  “  There’s  good  authority  for  it,  surely,”  said  Esmond. 

‘  “  For  a  son,  yes :  but  my  lord  is  not  my  son.  It  was  he  who 
broke  our  happiness  down,  and  he  bids  me  to  repair  it.  I  presume 
you  have  fulfilled  your  mission  now.  Sir.  Perhaps  you  too  have 
learned  to  love  drink,  and  to  hiccup  over  your  wine  or  punch ;  — 
which  is  your  worship’s  favourite  liquor  ?  Perhaps  you  too  put  up 
at  the  Rose  on  your  way  through  London,  and  have  your  acquaint¬ 
ances  in  Covent  Garden.  My  services  to  you,  Sir,  to  principal  and 
ambassador,  to  master  and — lacquey.’”  (VoL  i.  pp.  273—275.) 

Beatrix  is  inconsistent  in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  that  word. 
She  has  great  excellences  and  great  defects,  and  her  different 
qualities  interfere  with  one  another.  She  has  courage,  decision, 

Eresence  of  mind,  and,  for  some  purposes,  self-command.  She 
as  intelligence,  eloquence,  wit,  and  knowledge  of  men  and  of 
things.  This  powerful  machinery  is  directed  by  ambition  and 
vanity,  and  driven  by  a  strong  will.  But  her  pride  is  over¬ 
bearing,  her  affections  are  capricious,  her  temper  is  irritable  and 
wayward,  and  she  inherits  her  mother’s  jealousy.  She  has  a 
quick  moral  sense,  a  clear  perception  of  the  distinctions  between 
virtue  and  vice,  and  a  general  wish  to  do  right,  and  yet  she  is 
perpetually  doing  wrong — not  from  ignorance  or  carelessness,  or 
callous  familiarity  with  evil — she  b  conscious  of  her  faults  while 
she  is  committing  them,  conscious  of  her  defects  while  she  is 
yielding  to  them,  she  repents  when  all  b  over,  —  but  she 
obeys  the  passion  of  the  moment.  Here  are  two  views  of  her 
by  herself.  The  first  is  drawn  just  after  she  is  engaged  to  the 
Duke  of  Hamilton ;  — 

‘  “  I  hope  the  world  will  make  you  happy,  Beatrix,”  says  Esmond, 
with  a  sigh.  “  You’ll  be  Beatrix  till  you  are  my  Lady  Duchess — 
will  you  not  ?  I  shall  then  make  your  Grace  my  very  lowest  bow.” 

‘  **  None  of  these  sighs  and  this  satire,  cousin,”  she  says ;  I  take 
his  Grace’s  great  bounty  thankfully — yes,  thankfully;  and  will  wear 
his  honours  becomingly.  1  do  not  say  that  he  hath  touched  my  heart ; 
but  he  has  my  gratitude,  obedience,  admiration.  1  have  told  him  that, 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


235 


and  no  more ;  and  with  that  his  noble  heart  is  content.  I  am  twenty- 
five  years  old.”  “Twenty-six,  my  dear,”  says  Esmond.  “Twenty- 
five,  sir.  1  choose  to  be  twenty-five  ;  and  in  eight  years,  no  man  hath 
ever  touched  my  heart.  Yes,  you  did  once  for  a  little,  Harry,  when 
you  came  back,  after  Lille,  and  engaging  with  that  murderer,  Mohun, 
and  saving  Frank’s  life — I  thought  1  could  like  you;  and  mamma 
begged  me  hard,  on  her  knees,  and  I  did — for  a  day.  But  the 
old  chill  came  over  me,  Harry,  and  the  old  fear  of  you  and  your 
melancholy ;  and  I  was  glad  wlien  you  w’ent  away,  and  engaged  with 
my  Lord  Ashburnham,  that  I  might  hear  no  more  of  you,  that’s  the 
truth.  You  are  too  good  for  me  somehow.  I  could  not  make  you 
happy,  and  should  break  my  heart  in  trying  and  not  being  able  to 
love  you.  But  if  you  had  asked  me  when  we  gave  you  the  sword, 
you  might  have  had  me.  Sir,  and  we  both  should  have  been  miserable 
by  this  time.’  (Vol.  iii.  pp.  112,  113.) 

The  second  occurs  soon  after  that  engagement  has  terminated 
by  the  Duke’s  violent  death.  She  is  taking  leave  of  Esmond  as 
he  sets  out  on  his  perilous  expedition  to  bring  the  Pretender  to 
London :  — 

*  “  Stay,  Harry,”  continued  she,  with  a  tone  that  had  more  de¬ 
spondency  in  it  than  she  was  accustomed  to  show.  “Hear  a  last 
word;  I  do  love  you.  I  do  admire  you — who  would  not,  that  has 
known  such  love  as  yours  has  been  for  us  all  ?  But  I  think  1  hare 
no  heart.  At  least  I  have  never  seen  the  man  that  could  touch  it ; 
and  had  I  found  him,  I  would  have  followed  him  in  rags,  had  he 
been  a  private  soldier,  or  to  sea,  like  one  of  those  buccaneers  you 
used  to  read  to  us  about  when  we  were  children.  I  would  do  any¬ 
thing  for  such  a  man,  bear  anything  for  him ;  but  I  never  found  one. 
You  were  ever  too  much  of  a  slave  to  win  my  heart ;  even  my  Lord 
Duke  could  not  command  it.  I  had  not  been  happy  had  I  married 
him.  I  knew  that  three  months  after  our  engagement — and  was  too 
vain  to  break  it.  O  Harry !  1  cried  once  or  twice,  not  for  him,  but 
with  tears  of  rage  because  1  could  not  be  sorry  for  him.  1  was 
frightened  to  find  1  was  glad  of  his  death ;  and  were  I  joined  to  you, 
I  should  have  the  same  sense  of  servitude,  the  same  longing  to 
escape.  We  should  both  be  unhappy,  and  you  the  most,  who  are  as 
jealous  as  the  Duke  was  himself.  1  tried  to  love  him ;  1  tried,  indeed 
I  did :  affected  gladness  when  he  came ;  submitted  to  hear  when  he 
was  by  me ;  and  tried  the  wife’s  part  1  thought  I  was  to  play  for  the 
rest  of  my  days. 

‘But  half  an  hour  of  that  complaisance  wearied  me,  and  what 
would  a  lifetime  be  ?  My  thoughts  were  away  when  he  was  speak¬ 
ing  ;  and  I  was  thihking,  O  that  this  man  would  drop  my  hand,  and 
rise  up  from  before  my  feet.  I  knew  his  great  and  noble  qualities, 
greater  and  nobler  than  mine  a  thousand  times,  as  yours  are,  cousin, — 
1  tell  you  a  million  and  a  million  times  better.  But  ’twas  not  for 
these  I  took  him, — I  took  him  to  have  a  great  place  in  the  world,  and 
I  lost  it, — 1  lost  it,  and  do  not  deplore  him, — and  I  often  thought  as  I 
listened  to  his  fond  vows  and  ardent  words,  O,  if  I  yield  to  this  man 


236 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


!  Jaiu 


and  meet  the  other,  I  shall  hate  him  and  leave  him.  I  am  not  good, 
Harry :  my  mother  is  gentle  and  good,  like  an  angel ;  I  wonder  how 
she  should  have  had  such  a  child.  She  is  weak,  but  she  would  die 
rather  than  do  a  wrong ;  1  am  stronger  than  she,  but  I  would  do  it 
out  of  defiance.  I  do  not  care  for  what  the  parsons  tell  me  with 
their  droning  sermons  ;  1  used  to  see  them  at  court,  as  mean  and  as 
worthless  as  the  meanest  woman  there.  O  I  am  sick  and  weary  of 
the  world.  1  wait  but  for  one  thing,  and  when  ’tis  done  1  will 
take  Frank’s  religion  and  your  poor  mother’s,  and  go  into  a  nunnery 
and  end  like  her.”  ’ 

Here  is  a  grand  scene,  in  which  Lady  Castle  wood,  her  son, 
and  Esmond  force  her  into  the  country  to  escape  the  solicitations 
of  the  Prince.  Lady  Castlewood  proposes  to  accompany  her;  — 

‘  “  For  shame  !”  burst  out  Beatrix,  in  a  passion  of  tears  and' morti¬ 
fication.  “  You  disgrace  me  by  your  cruel  precautions  ;  my  own 
mother  is  the  first  to  suspect  me,  and  would  take  me  away  as 
my  gaoler.  I  will  not  go  with  you,  mother ;  I  will  go  as  no  one’s 
prisoner.  If  I  wanted  to  deceive,  do  you  think  1  could  find  no  means 
of  evading  you  ?  My  family  suspects  me.  As  those  mistrust  me 
that  ought  to  love  me  most,  let  me  leave  them  ;  I  will  go,  but  I  will 
go  alone :  to  Castlew'ood,  be  it.  I  have  been  unhappy  there  and 
lonely  enough;  let  me  go  back;  but  spare  me  at  least  the  humiliation 
of  setting  a  watch  over  my  misery,  which  is  a  trial  I  can’t  bear.  Let 
me  go  when  you  will,  but  alone,  or  not  at  all.  You  three  can  stay 
and  triumph  over  my  unhappiness,  and  I  will  bear  it  as  I  have  borne 
it  before.  Let  my  gaoler-in-chief  go  order  the  coach  that  is  to  take 
me  away.  1  thank  you,  Henry  Esmond,  for  your  share  in  the  con¬ 
spiracy.  All  my  life  long.  I’ll  thank  you,  and  remember  you ;  and 
you,  brother,  and  you,  mother,  how  shall  1  show  my  gratitude  to  you 
for  your  careful  defence  of  my  honour  ?” 

‘  She  swept  out  of  the  room  with  the  air  of  an  empress,  flinging 
glances  of  defiance  at  us  all,  and  leaving  us  conquerors  of  the  field, 
but  scared,  and  almost  ashamed  of  our  victory.  It  did  indeed  seem 
bard  and  cruel  that  we  three  should  have  conspired  the  banishment 
and  humiliation  of  that  fair  creature.  We  looked  at  each  other 
in  silence  ;  ’twas  not  the  first  stroke  by  many  of  our  actions  in  that 
unlucky  time,  which  being  done,  we  wished  undone.  We  agreed  it 
was  best  she  should  go  alone,  speaking  stealthily  to  one  another,  and 
under  our  breaths,  like  persons  engaged  in  an  act  they  felt  ashamed 
in  doing.’  (Vol.  iii.  pp.  260,  261.) 

We  are  always  ordered  to  admire  the  beauty  of  a  heroine; 
but  if  we  obey,  it  is  usually  an  act  of  faith.  The  description  is 
so  vague,  that  we  are  forced  to  take  her  charms  on  trust.  But 
Mr.  Thackeray’s  portrait  of  Beatrix  is  so  animated  and  so  in¬ 
dividualised,  that  it  affects  the  imagination  as  if  it  were  painted 
in  colours  instead  of  words  :  — 

‘She  was  a  brown  beauty;  that  is,  her  eyes,  hair,  and  eyebrows 
and  eyelashes,  were  dark :  her  hair  curling  with  rich  Fundulations, 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


237 


and  waving  over  her  shoulders ;  but  her  complexion  was  as  dazzling 
white  as  snow  in  sunshine ;  except  her  cheeks,  which  were  a  bright 
red,  and  her  lips,  which  were  of  a  still  deeper  crimson.  Her  mouth 
and  chin,  they  said,  were  too  large  and  full,  and  so  they  might  be  for 
a  goddess  in  marble,  but  not  for  a  woman  whose  eyes  were  fire,  whose 
look  was  love,  whose  voice  was  the  sweetest  love  song,  whose  shape 
was  perfect  symmetry,  health,  decision,  activity ;  whose  foot  as  it 
planted  itself  on  the  ground  was  firm  but  flexible,  and  whose  motion, 
whether  rapid  or  slow,  was  always  perfect  grace,  — agile  as  a  nymph, 
lofty  as  a  queen, —  now  melting,  now  imperious,  now  sarcastic,  there 
was  no  single  movement  of  hers  but  was  beautiful.  As  he  thinks  of 
her,  he  who  writes  feels  young  again,  and  remembers  a  paragon.* 
(VoL  iL  pp.  115,  116.) 

Beatrix  is  the  only  character  in  Esmond  that  interests  ;  but 
there  are  many  that  amuse.  All  of  them,  indeed,  amuse ;  for, 
except  when  he  is  playing  with  a  doll  which  he  wants  to  dress  up 
as  a  good  heroine,  Mr.  Thackeray  can  produce  nothing  that  ia 
not  amusing. 

One  of  the  best  is  Father  Holt.  !Mr.  Thackeray  has  wisely 
abandoned  the  demure  face  and  stealthy  walk  and  soft  hypocrisy 
of  the  conventional  Jesuit.  His  Jesuit  is  a  bold,  gay  man  of 
the  world,  frank  in  his  exterior,  intrepid  in  danger,  kind  and 
affectionate  to  those  whom  it  is  not  his  interest  to  injure,  un¬ 
scrupulous  when  an  instrument  is  to  be  obtained  or  an  obstacle 
is  to  be  removed,  and  keeping  in  a  separate  compartment  of  hia 
mind,  undisturbed  by  the  politics  with  which  the  rest  is  filled, 
his  classical  tastes  and  his  theological  speculations.  Such,  we 
have  no  doubt,  the  men  of  action  in  the  order,  the  men  whose 
intrigues  aimed  at  establishing  or  subverting  thrones,  always 
must  have  been  and  always  wiU  be. 

James  the  Third  has  sat  to  two  great  painters.  Walter  Scott 
took  him  in  middle  age,  and  painted  him  with  a  grave  and 
melancholy  expression ;  serious,  dignified,  and  imposing.  Mr. 
Thackeray  gives  him  to  us  in  his  youth,  before  he  had  been  sad¬ 
dened  by  disappointment  and  improved  by  experience.  His 
levity,  his  sensualism,  his  obstinacy,  his  ingratitude,  his  habitual 
sacrifice  of  the  future  to  the  present,  of  business  to  pleasure,  and 
of  every  person  and  of  every  purpose  to  his  own  immediate 
gratification,  are  features  boldly  conceived  and  vigorously  ex¬ 
ecuted  :  and  Mr.  Thackeray  has  skilfully  thrown  over  the  whole 
a  varnish  of  courtesy  and  graciousness,  which  softens  and  renders 
almost  pleasing  the  despicable  and  odious  character  that  lies 
beneath  it.  Sir  Walter  was  as  much  of  a  Jacobite  as  it  was  pos¬ 
sible  to  be  in  the  nineteenth  century.  Mr.  Thackeray’s  politics 
are  not  obtruded.  What  peeps  out  of  them  appears  to  us  to  be 
Whig.  James  the  Third  has  fared  in  their  hands  accordingly. 


238 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


We  cannot  quit  Esnaond  without  remarking  the  excellence  of 
the  still-life  vignettes  with  which  it  is  adorned.  Castlewood 
House  is  described  over  and  over,  and  always  with  fresh  beauty. 
With  great  skill  it  is  generally  made  to  form  the  background  of 
some  memorable  incident,  and  imprinted  with  that  incident  on 
the  conception  of  the  relator.  It  is  thus  introduced,  with  won¬ 
derful  effect,  just  after  the  parting  of  Mohun  and  Castlewood, 
in  apparent  amity,  but  with  a  fatsd  quarrel  in  the  heart  of  each. 

*  Lord  Castlewood  stood  at  the  door  watching  his  guest  and  his 
people  as  they  went  out  under  the  arch  of  the  outer  gate.  When  he 
was  there,  Lord  Mohun  turned  once  more;  my  Lord  Viscount  slowly 
raised  his  beaver,  and  bowed.  His  face  wore  a  peculiar  livid  look, 
Harry  thought.  He  cursed  and  kicked  away  his  dogs,  which  came 
jumping  about  him  — then  be  walked  up  to  the  fountain  in  the  centre 
of  the  court,  aud  leaned  against  a  pillar  and  looked  into  the  basin. 
As  Esmond  crossed  over  to  his  own  room,  late  the  chaplain’s,  on  the 
other  side  of  the  court,  and  turned  to  enter  in  at  the  low  door,  he  saw 
Lady  Castlewood  looking  through  the  curtains  of  the  great  window 
of  the  drawing  room  over  head  at  my  lord  as  he  stood  regarding  the 
fountain.  There  was  in  the  court  a  peculiar  silence  :  and  the 
scene  remained  long  in  Esmond’s  memory ;  —  the  sky  bright  over 
head :  the  buttresses  of  the  building  and  the  sun-dial  casting  shadow 
over  the  gilt  memento  mori  inscribed  underneath:  the  two  dogs,  a 
black  greyhound  and  a  spaniel  nearly  white,  the  one  with  his  face  up 
to  the  sun,  and  the  other  snuffing  amongst  the  grass  and  stones,  and 
my  lord  leaning  over  the  fountain,  which  was  plashing  audibly.  ’Tis 
strange  how  that  scene  and  the  sound  of  that  fountain  remain  fixed 
on  the  memory  of  a  man  who  has  beheld  a  hundred  sights  of  splen¬ 
dour,  and  danger  too,  of  which  he  has  kept  no  account’  (Vol.  i. 
pp.  313,  314,  315.) 

We  will  extract  another,  of  equal  vividness.  Esmond  is  revi- 
uting  Castlewood, 

‘  He  had  not  seen  its  ancient  grey  towers  and  well-remembered 
woods  for  nearly  fourteen  years,  and  since  he  rode  thence  with  my 
lord,  to  whom  his  mistress  with  her  young  children  by  her  side 
waved  an  adieu.  There  was  the  fountain  in  the  court  babbling  its 
familiar  music,  the  old  hall  and  its  furniture,  the  carved  chair  my 
late  lord  used,  the  very  fiagon  he  drank  from.  Esmond’s  mistress 
knew  he  would  like  to  sleep  in  the  little  room  he  used  to  occupy; 
’twas  made  ready  for  him,  and  wall-fiowers  and  sweet  herbs  set  in 
the  adjoining  chamber,  the  chaplain’s  room. 

‘Esmond  rose  up  before  the  dawn,  passed  into  the  next  room, 
where  the  air  was  heavy  with  the  odour  of  the  wall-flowers,  and 
tried  the  spring,  and  whether  the  window  worked  still.  The  spring 
had  not  been  touched  for  years,  but  yielded  at  length,  and  the  whole 
fabric  of  the  window  sank  down.  Esmond  closed  the  casement  up 
again,  os  the  dawn  was  rising  over  Castlewood  village;  he  could 


1854. 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


239 


hear  the  clinking  at  the  blacksmith’s  forge  yonder  among  the  trees, ' 
across  the  green,  and  past  the  river,  on  which  a  mist  still  lay  sleeping.’ 
(Vol.  iii.  pp.  171—174.) 

When  an  author  has  been  long  and  repeatedly  before  the 
public,  the  verdict  of  that  great  tribunal  is  likely  to  be  a  fair  one. 
We  believe  its  judgment  on  Mr.  Thackeray — a  judgment  which 
we  are  not  inclined  to  question — to  be  this  : 

That  he  is  a  bad  constructor  of  a  story  ;  that  his  openings  are 
tedious  and  involved,  his  conclusions  abrupt  and  unsatisfactory  ; 
and  that  the  intervening  space  is  filled  by  incidents  with  little 
mutual  dependence,  and  sometimes,  as  in  Pendennis,  repetitions 
of  one  another.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  admitted  that  these 
incidents,  taken  separately,  are  often  admirable,  well  imagined, 
and  well  told,  and  amusing  exhibitions  of  the  weaknesses  or 
the  vices  of  those  who  take  part  in  them. 

We  say  ‘  weaknesses  or  vices,’  because  this  is  the  second  re¬ 
proach  addressed  to  Mr.  Thackeray.  It  is  said  that  his  men,  if 
they  are  not  absurd,  are  tyrants  or  rogues :  that  his  women,  if 
they  are  not  fools,  are  intriguers  or  flirts.  This  accusation,  if 
it  an  accusation,  is  true  as  respects  his  men ;  and  nearly  true 
as  respects  his  women. 

If  the  dramatis  persona  of  Vanity  Fair  were  average  samples 
of  the  two  millions  who  form  the  nation  that  inhabits  London,  or 
'  even  if  they  were  samples  of  what  an  American  would  call  the 
Upper  Ten  Thousand  of  the  Londoners,  the  London  world 
would  be  a  detestable  one.  It  would  be  as  black  morally  as  it 
is  physically. 

Now  we  are  ready  to  admit  that  the  darkness  of  Mr. 
Thackeray’s  patterns  is  an  artistic  defect;  that  is  to  say,  we 
think  that  their  texture  and  general  effect  would  be  improved  by 
the  introduction  of  a  few  threads,  not  as  milkwhite  and  as  super¬ 
fine  as  Sir  Charles  Grandison  or  Clarissa,  but  of  good  average 
quality  and  colour ;  such  as  Belford,  or  Colonel  Morden,  or 
Miss  Howe,  or  Lady  G.  But  if  the  objection  be  not  to  the 
artistic  effect  but  to  the  truth  of  Mr.  Thackeray’s  characters, 
if  he  be  accused  of  giving  not  merely  an  unpleasant  but  a  false 
view  of  human  nature,  the  answer  is  this :  that  in  Esmond  the 
scene  is  laid  in  what  we  have  already  described  as  the  period  in 
which  the  English  character  was  most  demoralised ;  and  that  in 
Vanity  Fair  the  characters  are  taken  almost  exclusively  from 
two  classes — the  pursuers  of  nothing  but  wealth,  and  the 
pursuers  of  nothing  but  pleasure.  Mr.  Thackeray  paints  the 
former  as  v£un,  greedy,  purseproud,  oppressive,  and  overbearing 
in  prosperity,  and  grovelling  and  base  in  adversity,  and  envious 
and  suspicious  at  all  times.  He  describes  the  latter  as  frivolous. 


240 


Thackeray’s  Works. 


Jan. 


heartless,  and  false,  with  as  much  selfishness  and  vanity  and 
malignity  as  their  Russell- Square  neighbours,  though  concealed 
under  a  smoother  exterior.  And  who  can  say  that  these  pictures 
are  false  ? 

The  persons  who  form  the  elite  of  London  society,  the  men 
whose  objects  are  great  and  whose  pursuits  are  ennobling,  the 
politicians  and  men  of  science,  the  lawyers  and  physicians,  the 
men  of  literature  and  taste,  the  poets  and  artists — all  these  are 
as  much  ignored  as  if  the  writer  were  not  aware  of  their  exist¬ 
ence.  The  only  allusion  to  such  a  class  is  old  Osborne’s  com¬ 
plaint  that  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Frederic  Bullock,  ‘  invites  him 
*  to  meet  damned  littery  men,  and  keeps  the  earls  and  honour- 
‘  ables  to  herself.’  Vanity  Fair  is  not  a  fair  sample  of  the 
London  world  taken  as  a  whole,  but  is  a  not  very  exaggerated 
picture  of  two  portions  of  it. 

We  have  less  to  say  in  defence  of  Pendennis,  for  there  the 
field  is  wider,  and  yet  the  result  is  nearly  the  same.  Even  in 
Pendennis,  however,  though  the  hero  and  his  friend  Warrington 
are  literary  men,  their  literature  is  of  an  humble  kind.  It  is 
not  the  literature  of  statesmen,  historians,  or  philosophers,  of 
those  who  write  for  the  purpose  of  influencing,  or  instructing, 
or  improving  mankind  ;  it  is  not  the  literature  of  those  whose 
object,  though  more  selfish,  is  still  magnanimous  and  splendid, 
of  those  who  aim  at  widely  diftused  and  permanent  fame; — it  is 
the  literature  of  those  who  write  for  bread,  who  use  their  pens 
as  a  labourer  does  his  spade,  or  a  w'eaver  his  shuttle.  Unless 
there  be  some  reason  for  believing  that  hack  writers  in  general 
are  better  than  those  whom  Mr.  Thackeray  has  described,  we 
have  no  right  to  quarrel  with  his  descriptions.  There  are  too 
in  Pendennis  one  or  two  persons  whom  we  neither  laugh  at  nor 
hate.  There  is  Lauia,  who  is  intelligent  and  amiable,  though 
indeed  she  behaves  shamefully  to  the  poor  girl  from  the  por¬ 
ter’s  lodge.  There  is  a  Mr.  Pynsent,  in  whom  there  is  no 
harm.  There  is  a  Lady  Rockminster,  who  is  sensible  and  kind, 
though  rather  brusque.  In  fact,  however,  we  must  admit  that 
Pendennis  is  open  to  the  reproach  that  it  professes  to  be  a  fair 
specimen  of  English  morality,  and  is  not  so. 

Lastly,  Mr.  Thackeray  is  accused  of  lavishing  on  his  heroines 
undeserved  praise.  It  is  said,  that  having  with  great  skill  put 
together  a  creature  of  which  the  principal  elements  are  undis- 
criminating  afiection,  ill-requited  devotion,  ignorant  partiality, 
a  weak  will  and  a  narrow  intellect,  he  calls  on  us  to  worship 
his  poor  idol  as  the  type  of  female  excellence.  This  is  true. 
Mr.  Thackeray  does  all  this ;  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  blemishes 
in  bis  books.  Happily  it  is  a  blemish  that  can  be  removed  with 


1854.  Thackeray’s  Works.  241 

case.  Nothing  more  than  a  pair  of  scissors  is  necessary.  Let 
him  carefully  cut  out  eveiy^  puff  which  he  has  wasted  on  Amelia, 
and  Helen,  and  Laura,  and  Hachcl ;  let  him  leave  them,  as  all 
the  characters  in  a  novel  ought  to  be  left,  to  the  reader’s  un¬ 
biassed  judgment,  and  they  would  take  their  proper  rank  among 
his  dramatis  persona,  though  it  may  differ  from  that  to  which 
their  inventor  thinks  them  entitled. 

So  much  for  Mr.  Thackeray’s  faults.  As  to  his  merits,  it  is 
admitted  that  he  is  unrivalled  by  any  living  writer  as  an  in¬ 
ventor  and  a  describer  of  character ;  that  he  has  penetrated  into 
the  lowest  cells  of  pride,  vanity,  and  selhshncss,  and  laid  open 
some  of  the  secrets  of  the  human  prison-house  which  never 
were  revealed  before.  Every  reader  admires  the  ease  and 
vigour  of  his  dialogue,  its  sparkling  wit  and  its  humour,  some¬ 
times  broad,  sometimes  delicate,  but  always  effective. 

The  few  extracts  which  we  have  made  from  the  serious  por¬ 
tions  of  his  works  are  sufficient  to  show  that  he  has  groat  tragic 
powers.  Nothing  can  be  more  exquisitely  imagined  or  de¬ 
scribed  than  the  parting  of  George  Osborne  and  Amelia.  His 
natural  tendency,  however,  is  towards  comedy,  or  rather  towards 
satire.  He 

‘  Shines  in  exposing  knaves  and  painting  fools.’ 

But  his  favourite  amusement  is  the  unmasking  hypocrisy.  He 
delights  to  show  the  selfishness  of  kindness,  the  pride  of  hu¬ 
mility,  the  consciousness  of  simplicity.  If  any  of  Mr.  Thackeray’s 
characters  had  been  copied  from  real  life,  and  the  originals  could 
recognise  themselves  in  his  imitations,  they  never  would  tremble 
more  than  when  some  apparently  good  act  was  ascribed  to  them. 
They  would  expect  to  see  in  the  next  page  the  virtue  turn  into 
a  vice  or  a  weakness. 


Mr.  Thackeray,  in  his  English  Humourists,  resembles  little 
Mr.  Thackeray  as  a  satirist.  He  is  as  indulgent  to  his  real  as 
he  is  severe  towards  his  imaginary  characters.  He  treats,  indeed, 
Congreve  with  superciliousness,  and  Sterne  with  contempt 
almost  amounting  to  disgust,  and  trembles  before  the  awful 
phantom  of  Swift,  but  embraces  all  the  other  spirits  that  he  calls 
up — Addison,  Steele,  Prior,  Gay,  Pope,  Hogarth,  Smollett, 
Fielding,  and  Goldsmith — with  the  cordiality  of  a  brother  in 
the  craft. 

When  we  read  the  names  which  Mr.  Thackeray  has  strung 
together  in  his  list  of  humourists,  we  felt  some  doubt  as  to  his 
principle  of  classifieation,  as  to  the  common  quality  which 
grouped  together  writers  so  different  as  Pope  and  Sterne.  In 
VOL.  XCIX.  NO.  CCI.  B 


XUM 


242  Thackeray's  fVorks.  Jan. 

his  first  lecture  Mr.  Thackeray  professes  to  point  out  this 
common  quality :  — 

‘  The  humorous  writer,’  he  says,  ‘  besides  appealing  to  your  sense 
of  ridicule,  professes  to  awaken  and  direct  your  love,  your  pity,  your 
kindness your  scorn  for  untruth,  pretension,  imposture — your 
tenderness  for  the  weak,  the  poor,  tiie  oppressed,  the  unhappy.  To 
the  best  of  his  means  and  ability  he  comments  on  all  the  ordinary 
actions  and  passions  of  life  almost.  He  takes  upon  himself  to  be  the 
week-day  preacher,  so  to  speak.’ 

Now,  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  moral  writer  does  not  come 
within  so  capacious  a  definition  as  tliis.  At  the  head  of  the 
humourists  of  the  eighteenth  century  we  should  have  to  put 
Johnson,  Horace  Walpole,  and  Cowper;  for  never  were  men 
who  commented  more  diligently  on  all  the  ordinary  actions  and 
passions  of  life,  and  their  comments  were  deeply  tinged  with 
the  wisdom  resembling  absurdity,  and  the  absu^ity  resembling 
wisdom,  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  Humour. 

We  will  not,  however,  carp  any  more  at  Mr.  Thackeray’s 
nomenclature.  He  has  given  us  a  set  of  amusing  lectures  on 
interesting  persons,  and  we  need  not  inquire  further  into  his 
reasons  for  selecting  them.  Little  new  was  to  be  said  about 
Swift  after  Johnson  and  Scott,  or  about  Addison  after  Johnson 
and  Macaulay ;  but  we  were  glad  to  see  a  whole  lecture  given  to 
Steele,  to  whose  biography  less  attention  has  been  paid  than 
his  amusing  chequered  character  and  the  great  share  which  he 
occupies  in  our  earlier  English  literature  deserve. 

There  occurs,  however,  in  this  lecture  a  passage  which  leads 
us  to  suspect  that  Mr.  Thackeray  had  not  studied,  with  the 
attention  that  his  great  office  requires,  all  the  works  of  the 
authors  whom  he  is  criticising.  He  treats  the  dinner,  in  the 
Polite  Conversation,  as  a  specimen  of  the  habits  of  the  times. 
‘  Fancy,’  he  says,  ‘  the  moral  condition  of  that  society  in  which 

*  a  lady  of  fashion  provided  a  great  shoulder  of  veal,  a  sirloin,  a 

*  goose,  hare,  rabbit,  chickens,  partridges,  black  puddings,  and 

*  a  ham  for  a  dinner  for  eight  Christians.  Wliat  —  what  could 
‘  have  been  the  condition  of  that  polite  world  in  which  people 

*  openly  ate  goose  after  almond  pudding,  and  took  their  soup  in 

*  the  middle  of  dinner?’  (p.  155.)  Now,  the  great  Simon 
Wagstaff,  in  the  preface  to  his  immortal  work,  has  answered  all 
this  by  anticipation. 

‘  Some,’  he  says,  *  will  perhaps  object  that  when  I  bring  my 

*  company  to  dinner  I  mention  too  great  a  variety  of  dishes,  not 

*  consistent  with  the  art  of  cookery,  or  proper  for  the  season  of 
‘  the  year ;  and  part  of  the  first  course  is  mingled  with  the 

*  second ;  besides  a  failure  in  politeness  by  introoucing  a  black 


1854.  The  Machinery  of  Parliamentary  Legislation.  243 


‘  pudding  to  a  lord’s  table,  and  at  a  great  entertainment.  But 
‘  if  I  had  omitted  the  black  pudding,  what  would  have  become 
‘  of  that  exquisite  reason  given  by  Miss  Notable  for  not  eating 
‘  it  ?  The  world  perhaps  might  have  lost  it  for  ever,  and  I 

*  should  have  been  justly  answerable.  I  cannot  but  hope  that 

*  such  hypercritical  readers  will  please  to  consider  that  my 

*  business  was  to  make  so  full  and  complete  a  body  of  refined 

*  sayings  as  compact  as  I  could :  only  taking  care  to  produce 
‘  them  in  the  most  natural  and  probable  manner,  in  order  to 
c  allure  my  readers  into  the  very  substance  and  marrow  of  this 
(  most  admirable  and  necessary  art.* 

It  is  remarkable  that,  in  his  notice  of  Pope,  Mr.  Thackeray 
omits  the  works  in  which  Pope  was  strictly  a  humourist,  and 
notices  only  those  in  which  he  was  strictly  a  poet.  Now,  we 
sympathise  with  his  admiration  of  the  satire  on  Addison,  and  of 
the  conclusion  of  the  Dunciad,  though  we  should  hesitate  before 
we  admitted  that  in  the  latter  ‘  Pope  shows  himself  the  equal  of 
‘  all  poets  of  all  times.’  But  if  we  had  had  to  point  out  the  work 
in  which  the  peculiar  powers  of  Pope,  and  e8|)ecially  his  powers 
as  a  humourist,  shine  the  brightest,  we  should  have  selected  not 
the  Satires,  or  the  Dunciad,  but  the  Rape  of  the  Lock. 

The  best  of  the  lectures  is,  we  think,  that  on  Fielding ;  and 
we  are  delighted  to  read  Mr.  Thackeray’s  bold  and  cordial  and 
discriminating  praise  of  this  great,  but,  we  fear,  somewhat  ne¬ 
glected  artist ;  a  moralist,  from  whom  the  generation  that  is  now 
passing  away  imbibed  a  heartier  contempt  for  meanness  and 
duplicity,  and  a  heartier  sympathy  with  courage,  fran’Kness,  and 
manliness,  than  we  fear  are  to  be  acquired  from  the  more 
decorous  narratives  which  form  the  mental  food  of  their  suc¬ 
cessors. 


